Bianca Censori (born 5 January 1995) is an Australian architect and model known for her relationship with American rapper and fashion designer Kanye West, whom she married in a private ceremony in December 2022.


== Early life and education ==
Bianca Censori was born on 5 January 1995, in Melbourne, one of three daughters born to Alexandra and Elia "Leo" Censori. Her paternal grandparents, native of Giulianova, Italy, emigrated to Australia with their five children.
Censori attended Melbourne's Carey Baptist Grammar School and has a bachelor's and master's degree in architecture from the University of Melbourne. She was a student of architecture at DP Toscano Architects based in Collingwood, Victoria. Censori created the Nylons Jewelry brand after graduating from high school.


== Work and relationship with Kanye West and Yeezy ==
As of 2023, Censori is Head of Architecture at Yeezy, Kanye West's clothing and apparel company.
On 7 December 2022, West released a song inspired by her titled "Censori Overload" on Instagram. Censori legally married West in December 2022 under a confidential marriage license.
In September 2023, police in Venice were reported to be investigating West and Censori over "acts contrary to public decency" after the couple posted photos of themselves on a water taxi with West's pants pulled down and buttocks exposed, and Censori's head in his lap.
On Censori's 29th birthday on 5 January 2024, Kanye West posted several unreleased pictures of Censori on Instagram along with the caption: "Happy birthday to the most beautiful super bad iconic muse inspirational talented artist masters degree in architecture 140 IQ loving by my side everyday when half the world turned their backs on me and the most amazing step mom to our children I love you so much thank you for sharing your life with me." The same day, West posted a picture of Censori, wearing a Vultures sweatshirt and furry white boots, with the caption: "I miss you when I wake up before you." West subsequently trademarked the caption on 17 January and it has been rumoured by fans to be the title of his upcoming solo album. 
In January 2024, West said on his Instagram account that she would be with "no pants" in 2024. Further, in February 2024, there were concerns expressed when she was photographed out in public in the nude except for a see-through raincoat. In early April 2024, she made a similar appearance at a Los Angeles restaurant with her husband. During the development of the YZY APP by Yeezy, Censori allegedly sent an employee a file-sharing link containing explicit sexual content. These materials were accessible to minors working on the app, exposing them to inappropriate content during their development on the project. Milo Yiannopoulos stated in a TMZ Interview that "he's been authorized by Bianca to stress the allegations against her are offensive, disgusting, abhorrent, and wholly false."
Censori appears on the album cover of Vultures 1 (2024), the debut album of ¥$, a duo consisting of Kanye West and singer Ty Dolla Sign.
At the 2025 Grammy Awards, Censori and West caused controversy on the red carpet when Censori appeared wearing a sheer, transparent slip revealing her fully naked body.  West, dressed entirely in black, did not address the spectacle before the two left the event shortly after. Reports surfaced that they had been removed from the ceremony, though sources close to the Grammys denied this, stating that West had simply left after walking the red carpet.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Bianca Censori on Instagram