The United States Department of Education is a cabinet-level department of the United States government. It began operating on May 4, 1980, having been created after the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare was split into the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human Services by the Department of Education Organization Act, which President Jimmy Carter signed into law on October 17, 1979.
 
The Department of Education is administered by the United States secretary of education. It has 4,400 employees – the smallest staff of the Cabinet agencies – and a 2024 budget of $238 billion. The 2023 budget was $274 billion, which included funding for children with disabilities (IDEA), pandemic recovery, early childhood education, Pell Grants, Title I, work assistance, among other programs. This budget was down from $637.7 billion in 2022. Its official abbreviation is ED ("DOE" refers to the United States Department of Energy) but is also abbreviated informally as "DoEd".
In February 2025, it was implied that President Donald Trump would prepare an executive order to effectively abolish or curtail the department. Elon Musk, the head of the department of government efficiency, DOGE, has publicly stated that the department no longer "exists".


== Purpose and functions ==
Unlike the systems of many other countries, education in the United States is organized at a subnational level by each of the fifty states. Under the 10th Amendment, the federal government and Department of Education should not be involved in determining curricula or educational standards or establishing schools or colleges. The Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) oversees schools located on American military bases and the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Indian Education supports tribally controlled schools. The quality of higher education institutions and their degrees are maintained through an informal private process known as accreditation, over which the Department of Education has no direct public jurisdictional control.
The department identifies four key functions:

Establishing policies on federal financial aid for education and distributing as well as monitoring those funds.
Collecting data on America's schools and disseminating research.
Focusing national attention on key issues in education, and makes recommendations for education reform.
Prohibiting discrimination and ensuring equal access to education.
The Department of Education is a member of the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness and works with federal partners to ensure proper education for homeless and runaway youth in the United States.


== Budget ==

For 2006, the ED discretionary budget was $56 billion and the mandatory budget contained $23 billion. In 2009 it received additional ARRA funding of $102 billion. In 2011, the discretionary budget was $70 billion.


== History ==


=== Early history ===
The department's origin goes back to 1867, when President Andrew Johnson signed legislation for a Department of Education. It was seen as a way to collect information and statistics about the nation's schools and provide advice to schools in the same way the Department of Agriculture helped farmers. The department was originally proposed by Henry Barnard and leaders of the National Teachers Association, renamed the National Education Association. Barnard served as the first commissioner of education. He resigned when the office was reconfigured as a bureau in the Department of Interior, known as the United States Office of Education due to concerns it would have too much control over local schools.
Over the years, the office remained relatively small, operating under different titles and housed in various agencies, including the United States Department of the Interior and the former United States Department of Health Education and Welfare (DHEW), now the United States Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). In 1920, an unsuccessful attempt at creating a Department of Education, headed by a secretary of education, came with the Smith–Towner Bill.
In 1939, the organization, then a bureau, was transferred to the Federal Security Agency, where it was renamed as the Office of Education. After World War II, President Dwight D. Eisenhower promulgated "Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953." The Federal Security Agency was abolished and most of its functions were transferred to the newly formed DHEW.


=== Promotion to department ===
In 1979, President Carter advocated for creating a cabinet-level Department of Education. Carter's plan was to transfer most of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare's education-related functions to the Department of Education. Carter also planned to transfer the education-related functions of the departments of Defense, Justice, Housing and Urban Development, and Agriculture, as well as a few other federal entities. Among the federal education-related programs that were not proposed to be transferred were Headstart, the Department of Agriculture's school lunch and nutrition programs, the Department of the Interior's Native Americans' education programs, and the Department of Labor's education and training programs.
Upgrading Education to cabinet-level status in 1979 was opposed by many in the Republican Party, who saw the department as unconstitutional, arguing that the Constitution does not mention education, and deemed it an unnecessary and illegal federal bureaucratic intrusion into local affairs. However, many see the department as constitutional under the Commerce Clause, and that the funding role of the department is constitutional under the Taxing and Spending Clause. The National Education Association supported the bill, while the American Federation of Teachers opposed it.
In 1979, the Office of Education had 3,000 employees and an annual budget of $12 billion. Congress appropriated to the Department of Education an annual budget of $14 billion and 17,000 employees when establishing the Department of Education. During the 1980 presidential campaign, Gov. Reagan called for the total elimination of the U.S. Department of Education, severe curtailment of bilingual education, and massive cutbacks in the federal role in education. Once in office, President Reagan significantly reduced its budget, but in 1989, perhaps to reduce conflict with Congress, he decided to change his mind and ask for an increase from $18.4 billion to $20.3 billion.


=== Late 20th century ===
The 1980 Republican Party platform called for the elimination of the Department of Education created under Carter, and President Ronald Reagan promised during the 1980 presidential election to eliminate it as a cabinet post, but he was not able to do so with a Democratic House of Representatives. In the 1982 State of the Union Address, he pledged: "The budget plan I submit to you on Feb. 8 will realize major savings by dismantling the Department of Education."
In 1984, the GOP dropped the call for elimination from its platform. With the election of President George H. W. Bush in 1988, the Republican position evolved in almost lockstep with that of the Democrats, with Goals 2000 a virtual joint effort.
In 1994, after the Newt Gingrich-led "revolution" took control of both houses of Congress, federal control of and spending on education soared. That trend continued unabated despite the fact that the Republican Party made abolition of the department a cornerstone of 1996 platform and campaign promises, calling it an inappropriate federal intrusion into local, state, and family affairs. The GOP platform read: "The Federal government has no constitutional authority to be involved in school curricula or to control jobs in the market place. This is why we will abolish the Department of Education, end federal meddling in our schools, and promote family choice at all levels of learning."
In 2000, the Republican Liberty Caucus passed a resolution to abolish the Department of Education.


=== 21st century ===
Abolition of the organization was not pursued under the George W. Bush administration, which made reform of federal education a key priority of the president's first term. In 2008 and 2012, presidential candidate Ron Paul campaigned in part on an opposition to the department.
Under President George W. Bush, the department primarily focused on elementary and secondary education, expanding its reach through the No Child Left Behind Act. The department's budget increased by $14 billion between 2002 and 2004, from $46 billion to $60 billion.
In March 2007, President George W. Bush signed into law H.R. 584, which designates the ED Headquarters building as the Lyndon Baines Johnson Department of Education Building.
In December 2015, President Barack Obama instituted the Every Student Succeeds Act, which reauthorized the Elementary Secondary Education Act. "In December 2015, the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) was signed into law, reauthorizing the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and replacing the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). ESEA, the federal law that authorizes federal funding for K-12 schools, represents the nation's commitment to equal educational opportunity for all students and has influenced the education of millions of children."


==== Second Trump administration ====
In 2025, 47th President Donald Trump nominated Linda McMahon as Secretary of Education. Trump emphasized that McMahon's primary objective would be to dismantle the Department of Education, stating, "I want her to put herself out of a job." While the administration is preparing an executive order to initiate the department's closure, legal experts note that abolishing a federal department requires congressional approval, making the feasibility of such an action uncertain. On February 7, after their request for a meeting with the acting secretary got no response, Democratic members of Congress attempted to enter the Department of Education but were denied access.
A Florida newspaper gave the following reasons for Trump's initiative:

Donald Trump has expressed a desire to eliminate the Department of Education, claiming it has been overtaken by "radicals, zealots, and Marxists."
He argues that the agency wastes taxpayer money and oversteps by involving the federal government in local education decisions, The Associated Press reported.
Trump's push for the department's closure is rooted in its perceived role in promoting liberal ideologies in schools.


== Organization ==


== See also ==

Council for Higher Education Accreditation
Educational attainment in the United States
Free Application for Federal Student Aid
FICE code
Federal Student Aid
National Diffusion Network
School Improvement Grant
Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations
National Endowment for the Humanities


=== Related legislation ===
1965: Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA)
1965: Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) (Pub. L. No. 89-329)
1974: Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
1974: Equal Educational Opportunities Act of 1974 (EEOA)
1975: Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EHA) (Pub. L. No. 94-142)
1978: Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment
1979: Department of Education Organization Act (Pub. L. No. 96-88)
1984: Equal Access Act
1990: The Jeanne Clery Disclosure of Campus Security Policy and Campus Crime Statistics Act (Clery Act)
1994: Improving America's Schools Act of 1994
2001: No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB)
2004: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
2005: Higher Education Reconciliation Act of 2005 (HERA) (Pub. L. No. 109-171)
2006: Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Improvement Act
2007: America COMPETES Act
2008: Higher Education Opportunity Act (HEOA) (Pub. L. No. 110-315)
2009: Race to the Top
2009: Student Aid and Fiscal Responsibility Act
2010: Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010
2015: Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Berube, Maurice R. American Presidents and Education (1991) from Washington to GHW Bush
Graham, Hugh Davis. The Uncertain Triumph: Federal Education Policy in the Kennedy and Johnson Years (U of North Carolina Press, 1984). online; narrow focus on political maneuvering
Heffernan, Robert V. Cabinetmakers: Story of the Three-Year Battle to Establish the U.S. Department of Education (2001), ISBN 978-0595158706
Kursh, Harry. The United States Office of Education : a century of service (1965) online, narrative  history; emphasizing 1960s
McAndrews, Lawrence J.  The Era of Education : The Presidents and the Schools, 1965-2001 (University of Illinois Press, 2006)
Mitchell, Shayla Lois Marie. "An historical analysis of the creation of a cabinet-level United States Department of Education" (PhD dissertation, . Diss. Georgia State University,;  ProQuest Dissertations & Theses,  2008. 3323225).
Munger,  Frank J., and Richard F. Fenno, Jr. National Politics and Federal Aid to Education (Syracuse University Press, 1962). online
Radin, Beryl A., and Willis D. Hawley (1988). Politics of Federal Reorganization: Creating the U.S. Department of Education, ISBN 978-0080339771
Rivlin, Alice M. The role of the Federal Government in financing higher education (Brookings 1961)  online
Seib, Shirley, Ed. Federal Role in Education (Congressional Quarterly, 1967),
Smith, Darrell Hevenor. The Bureau of Education Its History Activities and Organization (1923) online
Sniegoski, Stephen J. "A Bibliography of the Literature on the History of the US Department of Education and its Forerunners." (1988). online
Stallings, D. T. A brief history of the United States Department of Education, 1979-2002 (Center for Child and Family Policy, Duke University, 2002). online
Warren, Donald R. To Enforce Education: A History of the Founding Years of the United States Office of Education (Wayne State University Press, 1974), a leading scholarly history; online
Warren, Donald R.  "The U.S. Department of Education: A Reconstruction Promise to Black Americans." Journal of Negro Education 63:4 (February 1974), pp. 437-51. online


=== Primary sources ===
Examining the Policies and Priorities of the U.S. Department of Education. Hearing before the Committee on Education and Labor. U.S. House of Representatives, One Hundred Sixteenth Congress, First Session (April 10, 2019), 2020, ERIC ED606237


== External links ==
 
Official website 
Department of Education on USAspending.gov
Department of Education in the Federal Register
Department of Education | United States Government Manual
Department of Education reports and recommendations from the Government Accountability Office
Department of Education apportionments on OpenOMB
ERIC Digests Archived 16 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine – Informational digests on educational topics produced by the U.S. Department of Education before 1983.