XVideos, stylized as XVIDEOS, is a Czech-French pornographic video sharing and viewing website. Founded in Paris in 2007, the website is now registered to the Czech company WGCZ Holding. As of August 2024, it is the 25th-most-visited website in the world and the second most-visited adult website after Pornhub.
WGCZ Holding also owns Bang Bros, Penthouse magazine, Private Media Group, DDF Network and Erogames and has a controlling interest in the productions gathered under the Legal Porno brand.


== History ==

XVideos was founded in Paris in 2007 by the French owner Stephane Michael Pacaud. XVideos serves as a pornographic media aggregator, a type of website which gives access to adult content in a similar manner as YouTube does for general content. Video clips from professional videos are mixed with amateur and other types of content. By 2012, XVideos was the largest porn website in the world, with over 100 billion page views per month.
Fabian Thylmann, the owner of MindGeek (now Aylo), attempted to purchase XVideos in 2012 in order to create a monopoly of pornographic tube sites. The French owner of XVideos turned down a reported offer of more than US$120 million by saying, "Sorry, I have to go and play Diablo II."
In 2014, XVideos controversially attempted to force content providers to either pledge to renounce the right to delete videos from their accounts or to shut down their accounts immediately.


== Web traffic and ranking ==
As of August 2021, XVideos was the most-visited porn website and the seventh-most-visited website in the world, as ranked by Similarweb.
XNXX, another site owned by WGCZ Holding, was the tenth-most-visited website overall and the second-most-visited website in the adult category by 2021, although competitor Pornhub was ranked one slot above XNXX by 2024. Both XVideos and XNXX were also the world's most-visited websites for virtual reality videos in 2021.


== See also ==
Internet pornography
List of most visited websites
List of online video platforms
Porn 2.0


== References ==