The 2024 NFL season was the 105th season of the National Football League (NFL). The season began on September 5, 2024, with the reigning Super Bowl champion Kansas City Chiefs defeating the Baltimore Ravens in the NFL Kickoff Game. The regular season concluded on January 5, 2025.  The playoffs started on January 11 and concluded with the Philadelphia Eagles defeating Kansas City 40–22 in Super Bowl LIX, the league's championship game, at the Caesars Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana, on February 9.


== Player movement ==
The 2024 NFL league year and trading period started on March 13. On March 11, teams were allowed to exercise options for 2024 on players with option clauses in their contracts, submit qualifying offers to their pending restricted free agents, and submit a Minimum Salary Tender to retain exclusive negotiating rights to their players with expiring 2023 contracts and fewer than three accrued seasons of free agent credit. Teams were required to be under the salary cap using the "top 51" definition (in which the 51 highest paid-players on the team's payroll must have a combined salary cap). On March 13, clubs were allowed to contact and begin contract negotiations with players whose contracts had expired and thus became unrestricted free agents.


=== Free agency ===
Free agency began on March 13, 2024. Notable players to change teams included:

Quarterbacks Jacoby Brissett (Washington to New England), Kirk Cousins (Minnesota to Atlanta), Gardner Minshew (Indianapolis to Las Vegas), and Russell Wilson (Denver to Pittsburgh).
Running backs Saquon Barkley (New York Giants to Philadelphia), Austin Ekeler (Los Angeles Chargers to Washington), Ezekiel Elliott (New England to Dallas), Derrick Henry (Tennessee to Baltimore), Josh Jacobs (Las Vegas to Green Bay), Aaron Jones (Green Bay to Minnesota), Zack Moss (Indianapolis to Cincinnati), Tony Pollard (Dallas to Tennessee), Devin Singletary (Houston to New York Giants), and D'Andre Swift (Philadelphia to Chicago)
Wide receivers Odell Beckham Jr. (Baltimore to Miami), Marquise Brown (Arizona to Kansas City), Gabe Davis (Buffalo to Jacksonville), Darnell Mooney (Chicago to Atlanta), Calvin Ridley (Jacksonville to Tennessee), and Mike Williams (Los Angeles Chargers to New York Jets)
Tight ends Zach Ertz (Detroit to Washington), Gerald Everett (Los Angeles Chargers to Chicago),  Hayden Hurst (Carolina to Los Angeles Chargers), and Jonnu Smith (Atlanta to Miami)
Offensive linemen Trent Brown (New England to Cincinnati), Lloyd Cushenberry (Denver to Tennessee), Robert Hunt (Miami to Carolina), Jonah Jackson (Detroit to Los Angeles Rams), Damien Lewis (Seattle to Carolina), Tyron Smith (Dallas to New York Jets), Jonah Williams (Cincinnati to Arizona), and Kevin Zeitler (Baltimore to Detroit)
Defensive linemen Arik Armstead (San Francisco to Jacksonville), Calais Campbell (Atlanta to Miami), Danielle Hunter (Minnesota to Houston), Sheldon Rankins (Houston to Cincinnati), D. J. Reader (Cincinnati to Detroit), Christian Wilkins (Miami to Las Vegas), and Chase Young (San Francisco to New Orleans)
Linebackers Jadeveon Clowney (Baltimore to Carolina), Jonathan Greenard (Houston to Minnesota), Bryce Huff (New York Jets to Philadelphia), Eric Kendricks (Los Angeles Chargers to Dallas), Patrick Queen (Baltimore to Pittsburgh), and Bobby Wagner (Seattle to Washington)
Defensive backs Jamal Adams (Seattle to Tennessee), Chidobe Awuzie (Cincinnati to Tennessee). Kevin Byard (Philadelphia to Chicago), Quandre Diggs (Seattle to Tennessee), Kendall Fuller (Washington to Miami), C. J. Gardner-Johnson (Detroit to Philadelphia), Stephon Gilmore (Dallas to Minnesota), Marcus Maye (New Orleans to Miami), Xavier McKinney (New York Giants to Green Bay), Jordan Poyer (Buffalo to Miami), Justin Simmons (Denver to Atlanta), and Tre'Davious White (Buffalo to Los Angeles Rams)
Punters Cameron Johnston (Houston to Pittsburgh) and Tommy Townsend (Kansas City to Houston)


=== Trades ===
The following notable trades were made during the 2024 league year:

March 13: New England traded QB Mac Jones to Jacksonville in exchange for a 2024 sixth-round selection.
March 13: Cincinnati traded RB Joe Mixon to Houston in exchange for a 2024 seventh-round selection.
March 13: Carolina traded LB Brian Burns and a 2024 fifth-round selection to the New York Giants in exchange for 2024 second- and fifth-round selections, and a 2025 conditional fifth-round selection.
March 13: Pittsburgh traded WR Diontae Johnson and a 2024 seventh-round selection to Carolina in exchange for CB Donte Jackson and a 2024 sixth-round selection.
March 13: Tampa Bay traded CB Carlton Davis, and 2024 and 2025 sixth-round selections to Detroit in exchange for a 2024 third-round selection.
March 13: Baltimore traded OT Morgan Moses and a 2024 fourth-round selection (No. 134) to the New York Jets in exchange for a 2024 fourth- and sixth-round selection (Nos. 113 and 185).
March 14: The Los Angeles Chargers traded WR Keenan Allen to Chicago in exchange for a 2024 fourth-round selection.
March 14: Washington traded QB Sam Howell and 2024 fourth- and sixth-round selections to Seattle in exchange for 2024 third- and fifth-round selections.
March 14: Atlanta traded QB Desmond Ridder to Arizona in exchange for WR Rondale Moore.
March 15: Pittsburgh traded QB Kenny Pickett and a 2024 fourth-round selection to Philadelphia in exchange for a 2024 third-round selection and two 2025 seventh-round selections.
March 22: Kansas City traded CB L'Jarius Sneed and a 2024 seventh-round selection to Tennessee in exchange for a 2024 seventh-round selection and a 2025 third-round selection.
March 29: Philadelphia traded LB Haason Reddick to the New York Jets in exchange for a conditional 2026 second or third-round selection based on Reddick's performance.
April 3: Buffalo traded WR Stefon Diggs, a 2024 sixth-round selection (No. 189 overall), and a 2025 fifth-round selection to Houston in exchange for a 2025 second-round selection.
August 9: Minnesota traded CB Andrew Booth Jr. to Dallas in exchange for CB Nahshon Wright.
August 14: New England traded LB Matthew Judon to Atlanta in exchange for a 2025 third-round selection.
August 22: Washington traded WR Jahan Dotson and a 2025 fifth-round selection to Philadelphia in exchange for a 2025 third-round selection and two 2025 seventh-round selections.
August 22: Carolina traded LB Michael Barrett to Seattle in exchange for CB Mike Jackson.
October 15: Las Vegas traded WR Davante Adams to the New York Jets in exchange for a conditional 2025 second or third-round selection based on Adams' performance.
October 15: Cleveland traded WR Amari Cooper and 2025 sixth-round selection to Buffalo for a 2025 third- and 2026 seventh-round selection.
October 24: Tennessee traded WR DeAndre Hopkins to Kansas City in exchange for a 2025 fourth or fifth-round selection based on Hopkins' performance.
October 29: Carolina traded WR Diontae Johnson and a 2025 sixth-round selection to Baltimore in exchange for a 2025 fifth-round selection.
November 5: The Los Angeles Rams traded CB Tre'Davious White and a 2027 seventh-round selection to Baltimore in exchange for a 2026 seventh-round selection.
November 5: New Orleans traded CB Marshon Lattimore and a 2025 fifth-round selection to Washington in exchange for 2025 third-, fourth- and sixth-round selections.
November 5: Cleveland traded LB Za'Darius Smith and a 2026 seventh-round selection to Detroit in exchange for a 2025 fifth-round selection and a 2026 sixth-round selection.


=== Retirements ===
Notable retirements

DT Fletcher Cox – Six-time Pro Bowler, four-time All-Pro (one first-team, three second-team), and Super Bowl LII champion. Played for Philadelphia during his entire 12-year career.
DT Aaron Donald – Ten-time Pro Bowler, eight-time first-team All-Pro, three-time Defensive Player of the Year (2017, 2018, and 2020), 2014 Defensive Rookie of the Year, and Super Bowl LVI champion. Played for the St. Louis/Los Angeles Rams during his entire 10-year career.
QB Nick Foles – One-time Pro Bowler and Super Bowl LII champion and MVP. Played for Philadelphia, the St. Louis Rams, Kansas City, Jacksonville, Chicago, and Indianapolis during his 11-year career.
CB Chris Harris Jr. – Four-time Pro Bowler, three-time All-Pro (one first-team, two second-team), and Super Bowl 50 champion. Played for Denver, the Los Angeles Chargers, and New Orleans during his 12-year career.
C Jason Kelce – Seven-time Pro Bowler, six-time first-team All-Pro, and Super Bowl LII champion. Played for Philadelphia during his entire 13-year career.
QB Matt Ryan – Four-time Pro Bowler, one-time first-team All-Pro, 2008 Offensive Rookie of the Year, 2016 Offensive Player of the Year, and 2016 NFL MVP. Played for Atlanta and Indianapolis during his 15-year career.
WR Matthew Slater – Ten-time Pro Bowler, eight-time All-Pro (five first-team, three second-team) as a special teams player, and three-time Super Bowl champion (XLIX, LI, and LIII). Played for New England during his entire 16-year career.
Other retirements


=== Draft ===
The 2024 NFL draft took place around Campus Martius Park and Hart Plaza in Detroit, Michigan, on April 25–27. Chicago held the first selection via a trade from Carolina, who posted the league's worst record in 2023, and selected quarterback Caleb Williams. Five other quarterbacks—Jayden Daniels, Drake Maye, Michael Penix Jr., J. J. McCarthy, and Bo Nix—were taken in the first round, tying the 1983 draft for the most in NFL history.


== 2024 deaths ==


=== Pro Football Hall of Fame members ===
Larry Allen
Allen played 14 seasons in the NFL as an offensive guard with the Dallas Cowboys and San Francisco 49ers, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 2013. He was an 11-time Pro Bowler, seven-time All-Pro (six first-team, one second-team), Super Bowl XXX champion, and was selected to the 1990s and 2000s NFL All-Decade teams and NFL 100th Anniversary All-Time Team. He died on June 2, age 52.
Jimmy E. Johnson
Johnson played 16 seasons in the NFL as a cornerback with the San Francisco 49ers, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1994. He was a five-time Pro Bowler, eight-time All-Pro (four first-team, four second-team), and won the George Halas Award in 1972. He died on May 9, age 86.
Jim Otto
Otto played 15 seasons in the AFL and NFL as a center with the Oakland Raiders, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1980. He was a nine-time AFL All-Star and three-time Pro Bowler, 12-time All-Pro or All-AFL (nine first-team All-AFL, one first-team All-Pro, second-team All-Pro, and second-team All-AFL), was selected to the NFL 100th Anniversary All-Time Team and the AFL All-Time Team, and was a 1967 AFL Champion. He died on May 19, age 86.
Joe Schmidt
Schmidt played 13 seasons in the NFL as a linebacker with the Detroit Lions, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1973. He was a 10-time Pro Bowler, 10-time All-Pro (eight first-team, two second-team), two-time NFL champion (1953 and 1957), and was selected to the NFL 1950s All-Decade Team and NFL 100th Anniversary All-Time Team. He also served as head coach of the Lions for six seasons. He died on September 11, age 92.
Billy Shaw
Shaw played nine seasons in the AFL a guard with the Buffalo Bills, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1999. He was an eight-time AFL All-Star and seven-time All-AFL (five first-team, two second-team), two-time AFL champion (1964 and 1965), and was selected to the AFL All-Time Team. He died on October 4, age 85.
O. J. Simpson
Simpson played 11 seasons in the NFL as a running back with the Buffalo Bills and the San Francisco 49ers, and was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1985. He was a five-time Pro Bowler, five-time first-team All-Pro, and the 1973 NFL MVP and Offensive Player of the Year. He was also a four time NFL rushing yards leader (1972, 1973, 1975, 1976), two time NFL rushing touchdowns leader (1973, 1975), and the NFL scoring leader in 1975. He was also the first player in NFL history to rush for 2,000 yards in a single season. He died on April 10, age 76.


=== Active personnel ===
Khyree Jackson
Jackson was a rookie cornerback for Minnesota. He died on July 6, age 24, in a car accident.
Joe D'Alessandris
D'Alessandris was the offensive line coach for Baltimore since 2017. He died on August 24, age 70.


== Rule changes ==
The following rule changes were approved at the NFL Owners' Meeting on March 25–26:

The hip-drop tackle, in which a player "grabs the runner with both hands or wraps the runner with both arms" and "unweights himself by swiveling and dropping his hips and/or lower body, landing on and trapping the runner's leg(s) at or below the knee,"  was made illegal, penalized as a personal foul (15 yards) and automatic first down if committed by the defense.
Coaches receive a third challenge if either of their first two challenges are upheld. Previously, both challenges needed to be successful to receive a third challenge.
Major fouls committed by the offense is enforced if both teams commit a foul on a play that results in a change of possession. Previously, major fouls committed by the offense were ignored in that situation.

The following rule changes for kickoffs were in place for the season on a trial basis, subject to renewal in 2025:
While the kickoff are still taken from the kicking team's 35-yard line, all players from the kicking team except the kicker must line up at the receiving team's 40-yard line.
The receiving team must have at least nine players in the "set-up zone" (the area between its own 35- and 30-yard lines) and may have a maximum of two returners.
Except for the kicker and the returners, no player on either team may move until the ball touches either the ground or a receiving team player. The kicker must also not cross midfield until those other players are allowed to move.
The kick must land in the "landing zone", between the 20-yard line and the end zone. If it lands short of the 20-yard line, it is treated like a kickoff out-of-bounds and the receiving team gets the ball at its 40-yard line.
If the kick sails into or beyond the end zone for a touchback, the receiving team receives the ball at its 30-yard line.
If the kick bounces into the end zone for a touchback, the receiving team receives the ball at its 20-yard line.
No fair catch or signal is allowed.
During the fourth quarter, the trailing team may choose to attempt an onside kick using the pre-2024 kickoff formation. If an onside kick goes beyond the receiving team's setup zone untouched, the receiving team receives possession at the kicking team's 20 yard line.
A tee may now be used on a free kick following a safety.
Rulings of passer down by contact or out of bounds before throwing a pass were made reviewable.
Replay reviews when there is "clear and obvious visual evidence" that the game clock expired before the snap were authorized.
The trade deadline was moved from the Tuesday following Week 8 to the Tuesday following Week 9.


== Preseason ==
The majority of training camps were opened on July 24. The preseason began on August 1 with the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game, in which the Chicago Bears (represented in the 2024 Hall of Fame class by Devin Hester, Steve McMichael, and Julius Peppers) defeated the Houston Texans (represented by Andre Johnson).


== Regular season ==
The season was played over an 18-week schedule, beginning on September 5, 2024, and ending on January 5, 2025. Each of the league's 32 teams played 17 games, with one bye week.
Each team plays the other three teams in its own division twice, one game against each of the four teams from a division in its own conference, one game against each of the four teams from a division in the other conference, one game against each of the remaining two teams in its conference that finished in the same position in their respective divisions the previous season (e.g., the team that finished fourth in its division would play all three other teams in its conference that also finished fourth in their divisions), and one game against a team in another division in the other conference that also finished in the same position in their respective division the previous season.
The division pairings for 2024 were:

Highlights of the 2024 season included the following:

NFL Kickoff Game: The season began with the Kickoff Game on September 5, 2024, with Baltimore at defending Super Bowl LVIII champion Kansas City.  Kansas City won the game.
NFL International Series: Five International Series games are on the 2024 schedule. The first game was Green Bay at Philadelphia on September 6 at Arena Corinthians in São Paulo, Brazil, which was the first NFL regular season game held in South America. Three games were also held in London, England, with the New York Jets at Minnesota on October 6 at Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, Jacksonville at Chicago on October 13 at Tottenham, and New England at Jacksonville on October 20 at Wembley Stadium. The fifth game was the New York Giants at Carolina at Allianz Arena in Munich, Germany on November 10. Philadelphia, Minnesota, Chicago, Jacksonville, and Carolina won the games.
Thanksgiving: Three Thanksgiving Day games were held on November 28, with Chicago at Detroit and the New York Giants at Dallas in the traditional afternoon doubleheader, and Miami at Green Bay in the primetime game. Detroit, Dallas, and Green Bay won the games.
Christmas: Two Christmas games were held on December 25, with Kansas City at Pittsburgh and Baltimore at Houston. Kansas City and Baltimore won the games.


=== Scheduling changes ===
This was the second season that the league's flexible scheduling system included Monday Night Football games and increased the amount of cross-flexing (switching) of Sunday afternoon games between CBS and Fox.
Week 8: 

The Philadelphia–Cincinnati game was moved from 4:25 p.m. ET to 1:00 p.m. ET, trading time slots with the Chicago–Washington game; both games remaining on CBS.
Week 9:  

The Indianapolis–Minnesota game, originally scheduled for 1:00 p.m. ET on CBS, was flexed into NBC Sunday Night Football at 8:20 p.m. ET, replacing the originally scheduled Jacksonville–Philadelphia game, which was moved to 4:05 p.m. ET on CBS.
Week 11:  

The Cincinnati–Los Angeles Chargers game, originally scheduled for 4:25 p.m. ET on CBS, was flexed into NBC Sunday Night Football at 8:20 p.m. ET, replacing the originally scheduled Indianapolis–New York Jets game, which was moved to 1:00 p.m. ET on CBS.
Week 16: 

The Denver–Los Angeles Chargers game, originally scheduled for 4:05 p.m. ET on Fox, was flexed into Thursday Night Football at 8:15 p.m. ET on Prime Video, replacing the originally scheduled Cleveland–Cincinnati game, which was moved to 1:00 p.m. ET on Sunday on CBS, though it was originally going to be on Fox before being cross-flexed. Although this required Denver to play a second away Thursday game, which is above the league's limit of one per season, Denver agreed to the change.
The New England–Buffalo game was also moved from 1:00 p.m. ET to 4:25 p.m. ET, remaining on CBS.
Week 17: 

Three games were played on Saturday, December 28, on the NFL Network: Los Angeles Chargers–New England at 1:00 p.m. ET, Denver–Cincinnati at 4:30 p.m. ET, and Arizona–Los Angeles Rams at 8:15 p.m. ET.
The Atlanta–Washington game was flexed into NBC Sunday Night Football at 8:20 p.m. ET, replacing the originally scheduled Miami–Cleveland game, which was moved to 4:05 p.m. ET on CBS.
The Green Bay–Minnesota game was moved from 1:00 p.m. ET to 4:25 p.m. ET, trading time slots with the Dallas–Philadelphia game; both games remaining on Fox.
Week 18:

All Week 18 games were initially listed with a kickoff time of "TBD" and the schedule was released on December 29 after the Sunday games of Week 17 were completed.
Two games were selected for the Saturday doubleheader on ESPN and ABC: Cleveland–Baltimore at 4:30  p.m. ET and Cincinnati–Pittsburgh at 8:15  p.m. ET.
The Minnesota–Detroit game, which decided the NFC North champion and the top-seed in the NFC, was selected as the final NBC Sunday Night Football game at 8:20  p.m. ET.


== Regular season standings ==


=== Division ===


=== Conference ===

Tiebreakers

Pittsburgh clinched the #6 seed over Denver due to head-to-head victory.
Indianapolis finished ahead of Miami due to head-to-head victory.
Jacksonville finished ahead of New England due to head-to-head victory.
New England finshed ahead of Las Vegas due to strength of victory. (New England .471 to Las Vegas .353)
Cleveland finished ahead of Tennessee due to sterength of victory. (Cleveland .510 to Tennessee .431)

Tiebreakers:

Tampa Bay clinched the #3 seed over Los Angeles due to conference record. (Tampa Bay 8-4 to Los Angeles 6-6)
Los Angeles clinched the NFC West & #4 seed over Seattle due to strength of victory. (Los Angeles .441 to Seattle .424)
Atlanta finished ahead of Arizona due to conference record. (Atlanta 7-5 to Arizona 4-8)
Chicago finished ahead of Carolina due to head-to-head victory.
Carolina finished ahead New Orleans due to strength of victory. (Carolina .329 to New Orleans .306)


== Postseason ==

The playoffs began with the Wild Card round, with three Wild Card games played in each conference. Wild Card games took place on January 11–13, 2025. In the Divisional round on January 18 and 19, the top seed in the conference played the lowest remaining seed and the other two remaining teams played each other. The winners of those games advanced to the AFC and NFC Championship games played on January 26. Super Bowl LIX between the Kansas City Chiefs and the Philadelphia Eagles was held on February 9 at Caesars Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana.


=== 2024–25 NFL playoffs ===


== Records, milestones, and notable statistics ==
Week 1

Ryan Rehkow set the record for gross punt average in a game (minimum four punts), with 64.5 yards. The previous record of 63.6 yards was held by A. J. Cole III.
Lamar Jackson passed Russell Wilson for the third-most career rushing yards for a quarterback.
Week 2

Braelon Allen tied the record for youngest player to score a touchdown from scrimmage, at age 20 years, 239 days.  He shares the record with Arnie Herber.
Allen also set the record for becoming the youngest player to score multiple touchdowns in a game.
Brock Bowers set the record for most receptions and receiving yards in a tight end's first two games of his career, with 15 and 156 respectively.
The Green Bay Packers became the first NFL franchise to have 800 wins.
Week 3

Aaron Rodgers became the sixth quarterback to win 150 starts.
Malik Nabers set the record for becoming the youngest wide receiver to have multiple touchdowns in a game, at 21 years, 56 days of age.  The previous record of 21 years, 73 days was held by Mike Evans.
Nabers also became the first player with at least 20 receptions, 250 receiving yards, and three touchdowns in his first three career games.
Patrick Mahomes set the record for most wins in a quarterback's first 100 starts, ultimately with 78.  The previous record of 76 was shared by Tom Brady and Roger Staubach.
Jayden Daniels set the record for highest completion percentage for a rookie in a game (minimum 20 attempts), completing 91.3% of his passes. The previous record of 88.9% was held by Dak Prescott.
The Washington–Cincinnati game was the first game to have no turnovers or punts since 1940.
Week 4

Bobby Wagner passed Zach Thomas for fourth place in career tackles.
Malik Nabers became the third player in the Super Bowl era to have at least 30 receptions in his first four games, joining Puka Nacua and Anquan Boldin.
Sam Darnold became the first quarterback in the Super Bowl era to win and have at least two passing touchdowns in each of his first four games with a new team.
Jared Goff set the record for most completed passes in a game without an incomplete pass, with 18.  The previous record of 10 was held by Kurt Warner.
Goff also set the record for most passing yards in a game without an incomplete pass, with 292.  The previous record of 179 was held by Frank Filchock.
Week 5

Aaron Rodgers became the ninth player to have 60,000 passing yards.
Jayden Daniels became the first rookie to have at least 1,000 passing yards and 250 rushing yards in his first five games.
T. J. Watt joined his brother J. J. Watt to become the first set of brothers to have at least 100 sacks each.
Maxx Crosby became the fourth player to have at least one sack in ten consecutive games against a single opponent, doing so against the Denver Broncos.
Xavier McKinney became the first player since 1970 to intercept a pass in each of his first five games.
Week 6

Deebo Samuel became the first wide receiver to have at least 20 receiving touchdowns and 20 rushing touchdowns.
Lamar Jackson passed Cam Newton for the second-most career rushing yards for a quarterback.
Week 7

Brock Bowers set the record for most receptions in a tight end's first seven games of his career, with 47. The previous record of 42 was held by Keith Jackson.
Mike Evans became the 11th player to reach 100 touchdown receptions.
Week 8

Patrick Mahomes became the fastest player to reach 30,000 passing yards, doing so in 103 games. The previous record of 109 games was held by Matthew Stafford.
Justin Jefferson set the record for most games with at least 100 receiving yards in a player's first five seasons, currently with 33. Randy Moss held previous record, with 30 games.
Week 9

Derek Carr became the first starting quarterback to have lost to 31 different NFL teams.
Matthew Stafford became the ninth player to have 5,000 career pass completions.
Derrick Henry became the 10th player to reach 100 rushing touchdowns.
Henry also became the third player to have at least ten rushing touchdowns in seven straight seasons, joining Adrian Peterson and LaDainian Tomlinson.
Lamar Jackson set the record for most career games with a perfect passer rating (minimum 10 attempts per game), with four. He shared the previous record of three with four other players.
Kamren Kinchens tied the record for the longest non-special teams touchdown by a rookie, with a 103-yard interception return.  He shares the record with Pete Barnum.
Week 10

Ja'Marr Chase set the record for most receiving yards against a single opponent in a season, with 457 in two games against Baltimore. The previous record of 428 yards was held by Art Powell.
Chase also became the first player to have multiple games with at least 250 receiving yards and two receiving touchdowns.
Justin Herbert set the record for most completed passes in a player's first five seasons, currently with 1,772. The previous record of 1,759 passes was held by Derek Carr.
Josh Allen set the record for most games with at least 250 passing yards and 50 rushing yards, with 14. He shared the previous record of 13 with Lamar Jackson, Cam Newton, and Russell Wilson.
Jalen Hurts became the first quarterback to have 10 rushing touchdowns in four consecutive seasons.
Week 11

Brock Bowers set the record for most receptions in a game by a rookie tight end, with 13. The previous record of 12 was held by Mark Bavaro.
Week 12

Kaʻimi Fairbairn set the record for most field goals made in a season from at least 50 yards, currently with 12. He shared the previous record of 11 with Daniel Carlson.
Patrick Mahomes tied the record for most games with at least three passing touchdowns and no interceptions during a player's first eight seasons, with 24.  He shares the record with Russell Wilson.
Week 13

Josh Allen became the first player to score a rushing touchdown, a receiving touchdown and multiple passing touchdowns in a single game.
Bobby Wagner extended his streak of recording 100 tackles in a season to 13 years. He is the second player to record the feat, joining London Fletcher.
Jayden Daniels became the first rookie to complete 80 percent of his passes, throw three touchdowns, and run for a touchdown in a single game.
Jameis Winston became the first player in the Super Bowl era to have at least 400 passing yards, four passing touchdowns and two interceptions returned for touchdowns in a game.
Justin Herbert became the third player to have at least 10 consecutive games without interception (minimum 15 attempts per game), joining Tom Brady and Derek Carr.
The Pittsburgh Steelers tied the record for most consecutive seasons finishing with a winning percentage of .500 or better, with 21. They share the record with the Dallas Cowboys, who did so from 1965 to 1985.
The Cincinnati Bengals tied the single-season record for most games lost while scoring at least 30 points, with four.  They share the record with the 2002 Kansas City Chiefs.
Week 14

Brock Bowers set the record for most receptions in a season for a rookie tight end, currently with 87. The previous record of 86 was held by Sam LaPorta.
Josh Allen became the second player to pass for three touchdowns and rush for three touchdowns in a game.
Allen also set the record for most games with multiple passing touchdowns and multiple rushing touchdowns, with five.  The previous record of four was held by Steve Young.
Puka Nacua tied the record for most games with at least 150 scrimmage yards by a wide receiver in his first two seasons, with five.  He shares the record with Randy Moss and Jerry Rice.
Justin Jefferson became the first player to have 7,000 receiving yards in his first five seasons.
The Buffalo Bills became the first team to lose a game despite scoring at least six touchdowns and having no turnovers.
Week 15

Lamar Jackson became the second quarterback to record 6,000 career rushing yards, joining Michael Vick.
Jayden Daniels became the fifth player and first rookie to have a completion percentage of at least 80% in four games in a season (minimum 20 attempts per game).
Davante Adams became the 12th player to reach 100 touchdown receptions.
Week 16

Cameron Dicker set the record for the longest successful fair catch kick, at 57 yards. The previous record of 52 yards was held by Paul Hornung.  This was also the first successful fair catch kick since 1976.
Brock Bowers became the third rookie tight end to have at least 1,000 receiving yards in a season, joining Mike Ditka and Kyle Pitts.
Jayden Daniels became the sixth rookie to throw five touchdown passes in a game.
Daniels also set the record for most Rookie of the Week awards, with ten. The previous record of nine was held by Ben Roethlisberger.
Week 17

Lamar Jackson set the record for most career rushing yards for a quarterback, with 6,110. The previous record of 6,109 was held by Michael Vick.
Joe Burrow became the fourth player to have in a season at least 10 games with at least 250 passing yards and three passing touchdowns.
Brock Bowers set the record for most receptions in a season by a rookie, ultimately with 108. The previous record of 105 was held by Puka Nacua.
Bowers also set the record for most receiving yards by a rookie tight end in a season, currently with 1,144. The previous record of 1,076 was held by Mike Ditka.
Saquon Barkley became the ninth player to have 2,000 rushing yards in a season.
Jayden Daniels set the record for most rushing yards by a rookie quarterback, finishing with 891. The previous record of 815 was held by Robert Griffin III.
Aaron Rodgers set the record for most sacks taken by a quarterback in his career, with 568. The previous record of 565 was held by Tom Brady.
Malik Nabers and Tyrone Tracy became the second pair of rookie teammates to each have 1,000 yards from scrimmage, joining Reggie Bush and Marques Colston.
The Buffalo Bills tied the record for most players to score a receiving touchdown in a season, with 13 players doing so.  They share the record with the 2016 Atlanta Falcons.
The Detroit–San Francisco game was the first game to have at least 10 combined touchdowns and no punts since 1937.
Week 18

Mike Evans tied the record for consecutive seasons with at least 1,000 receiving yards, with 11.  He shares this record with Jerry Rice. Evans also extended his own record of most such seasons to start his career.
Aaron Rodgers became the fifth player to have 500 passing touchdowns.
Trey McBride set the record for most receptions by a tight end in his first three seasons, with 221.  The previous record of 216 was held by George Kittle.
The Buffalo Bills became the first team to score at least 30 rushing touchdowns and at least 30 passing touchdowns in a season.
Wild Card Round

Derrick Henry tied the record for most postseason games with at least 150 rushing yards, with four. He shares the record with Terrell Davis.
Ladd McConkey set the record for most receiving yards in a postseason game by a rookie, with 197.  The previous record of 181 was held by Puka Nacua.
Bo Nix and Troy Franklin recorded the first rookie-to-rookie touchdown pass during a postseason game.
The Los Angeles Rams tied the record for most quarterback sacks in a postseason game, with nine. They share the record with three other teams.
The Minnesota Vikings set the record for most postseason games lost with 32. They shared the previous record of 31 with the Dallas Cowboys.
Divisional Round

The Washington Commanders and Detroit Lions set the record for most combined points scored in a quarter of a postseason game, with 42 points in the second quarter.
Conference Championship games

The Philadelphia Eagles set the record for the most points scored in a conference championship game, with 55. The previous record of 51 was held by the 1990 Buffalo Bills.
Philadelphia also tied the record for most rushing touchdowns in a postseason game, with seven. They share the record with the 1940 Chicago Bears.
Jalen Hurts set the record for most postseason rushing touchdowns by a quarterback, with nine. The previous record of eight was held by Steve Young.
Hurts also tied his own record for most rushing touchdowns by a quarterback in a postseason game, with three. In addition, he shares this record with Otto Graham.
Hurts and Saquon Barkley became the first pair of teammates to each score at least three rushing touchdowns in a postseason game.
Jayden Daniels set the record for most passing yards by a rookie in the postseason, with 577. The previous record of 572 was held by Russell Wilson.
Super Bowl LIX

Travis Kelce set the record for most career receptions in Super Bowls, with 35. The previous record of 33 was held by Jerry Rice.
Jalen Hurts became the first player to record at least 200 passing and 50 rushing yards in multiple Super Bowls.
Hurts also broke his own record for most rushing yards for a quarterback in a Super Bowl, with 72. The previous record was 70.


== Awards ==
The 14th Annual NFL Honors, honoring the best players from the 2024 season, was held at the Saenger Theater in New Orleans, Louisiana on February 6, 2025.


=== All-Pro team ===

The following players were named first-team All-Pro by the Associated Press (AP):


=== Players of the Week / Month ===
The following were named the top performers during the season:


== Head coaching and general manager changes ==


=== Head coaches ===


==== Off-season ====


==== In-season ====


=== General managers ===


==== Off-season ====


==== In-season ====


== Stadiums ==
On February 28, Washington announced that FedEx ended its naming rights agreement for what was FedExField two years before the scheduled end of the agreement. The team used the temporary name of Commanders Field before announcing a sponsorship with Northwest Federal Credit Union on August 27, in which the stadium was renamed Northwest Stadium.
On September 3, Cleveland announced a partnership with Huntington Bank in which the former Cleveland Browns Stadium was renamed Huntington Bank Field.


== Uniforms ==


=== Uniform changes ===
Cincinnati added orange pants into its uniform rotation for the first time in franchise history. The pants were paired with Cincinnati's orange alternate jersey and primary helmet during the team's season opener. The team also wore its new orange pants with the home black road white jersey twice each.
Cleveland announced that the team would be returning to white facemasks full time beginning with the 2024 season after featuring them for one game in each of the previous two seasons. Cleveland previously wore white facemasks from 1975 to 2005.
Denver unveiled new uniforms on April 22—the team's first uniform change since 1997. The primary logo and color scheme were retained. Denver implemented an additional throwback alternate uniform based on the team's 1977 "Orange Crush" design.
Detroit unveiled new uniforms on April 18. The set features updated block numbers, nameplate typeface, and shoulder striping across all three designs. The color scheme was updated to a brighter shade of the team's "Honolulu blue". A black uniform serves as Detroit's alternate while their throwback uniform was retained as their second alternate.
Houston revealed four new uniforms on April 23, replacing the set used by the franchise since its inception. A new shade of "H-Town Blue" was incorporated on an alternate design. The original primary logo was retained and a secondary "H" logo was implemented.
Jacksonville introduced a throwback uniform based on their original 1990s uniform.
Minnesota unveiled a new alternate "Winter Warrior" set on June 6. The jersey is white with purple numbers accented by a silver outline. The pants are white with purple and silver stripes. It is the first Vikings jersey that does not include gold.
The New York Giants introduced a throwback design to commemorate the team's 100th season on May 17. The "Century Red" uniforms implement design elements from several of the team's early seasons. This set replaces the throwback-inspired white uniforms first used during the NFL's "Color Rush" program.
The New York Jets replaced their current designs with a new set that utilizes the team's legacy white throwback as its base template and updated their logos to accommodate the change. Green and black versions of the uniform were unveiled on April 15. The team unveiled "The Classic" on July 22, a design based on their uniforms worn during Super Bowl III.
Philadelphia added the updated wordmark from 2022 to their uniforms.
Washington added gold pants to its home uniform for the first time since 2018.


=== Alternate helmets ===
In April 2024, the NFL modified its uniform rule to allow for a third helmet option. The four teams that underwent a re-design process prior to the season, as noted above, have been offered a third helmet option, and it will be available to all teams starting in 2025. These alternate helmets can be paired with a team's throwback or alternate uniform; if it is with the throwback uniform, the helmet colors and designs must be historically compatible.

Baltimore revealed an alternate "Purple Rising" helmet for their all-purple uniforms. The helmet is purple and features a forward-facing Raven logo with a gold facemask.
Denver added a third "Legacy Blue" helmet to accompany their throwback uniform.
Detroit replaced the decals on their Honolulu blue helmet with a black version of the primary team logo and striping. The helmet was accompanied with the team's black alternate uniform.
Green Bay introduced a white helmet to their all-white uniform configuration.
Houston's alternate "H-Town Blue" uniform features the team's new "H" secondary logo as its primary helmet decal. The team's red alternate helmet was modified to include new decals that feature the team logo's horns on either side.
Jacksonville introduced a white alternate helmet, which they announced would be worn for one game.
Minnesota's "Winter Warrior" uniform features a new white alternate helmet. The helmet's logo outline, stripe and facemask are silver.
The New York Giants introduced a "Century Red" throwback helmet commemorating their 100th season in existence. It features winged red decals on the team's default blue shell.
The New York Jets reintroduced its white shell helmet for the aforementioned "The Classic" throwback uniform.


=== Patches ===
Carolina wore a patch that commemorated the 30th season of the franchise.
Jacksonville wore a patch that commemorated the 30th season of the franchise.
Las Vegas wore a patch that commemorated the 65th season of the franchise.
The New York Giants wore a patch that commemorated the 100th season of the franchise.
Teams playing on Thanksgiving wore a patch that commemorated former coach and commentator John Madden.


== Media ==


=== National ===


==== Linear television ====
This is the second season under 11-year U.S. media rights agreements with CBS, Fox, NBC, ESPN/ABC, and NFL Network along with its Spanish counterparts ESPN Deportes, Fox Deportes, and Telemundo Deportes. Under these linear television rights:

Sunday afternoon games are split between CBS and Fox. Both networks continued to carry the Sunday afternoon AFC and NFC packages, respectively. When the initial schedule was created, CBS and Fox were able to specify a limited number of games involving teams from their respective conference that they want to air, but otherwise the league was free to schedule games regardless of conference. Each network is scheduled to air ten doubleheaders, with both networks airing one on Weeks 15 and 18. On Thanksgiving, CBS broadcast the early Detroit game and Fox broadcast the late Dallas game. CBS also has the option of producing alternative broadcasts of select games on Nickelodeon.
NBC continued to air Sunday Night Football, the NFL Kickoff Game, and the primetime Thanksgiving game. NBC also aired an additional Saturday afternoon game on December 21. Due to NBC's coverage of the 2024 Summer Olympics, the 2024 Pro Football Hall of Fame Game was aired as an ESPN/ABC simulcast.
ESPN continued to produce Monday Night Football and the doubleheader on the last Saturday of the season. Originally, four MNF games and the Saturday doubleheader were set to be ESPN/ABC simulcasts. In October 2024, it was announced that ABC picked up simulcasts of six additional MNF games, bringing the ESPN/ABC simulcast total to twelve. Three weeks featured two MNF games split between ABC and ESPN. In April 2024, ESPN signed a contract extension with Omaha Productions to produce the alternative Manningcast on ESPN2 through 2034.
NFL Network aired four International Series and three late-season Saturday games.


==== Streaming ====
This is the third year of a 12-year deal with Amazon Prime Video and Twitch to exclusively stream Thursday Night Football. This is also the second season that Prime Video and Twitch streamed the game on the Friday after Thanksgiving under the title Black Friday Football. DirecTV has an agreement with Amazon to distribute Thursday Night Football games to business establishments.
Peacock simulcasts NBC's games. The platform also exclusively stream the NFL International Series game in Brazil (its second season in a six-year deal). Peacock's exclusive game was distribute to business establishments via Peacock Sports Pass on EverPass Media. Peacock streamed an alternate broadcast of NBC's Saturday December 21 game that used the league's player tracking data to render a live version of the game using elements of the Madden 25 video game.
ESPN+ simulcast select games on ABC, including games being simulcast on ESPN, as well as select Manningcast telecasts. The platform also exclusively streamed the second game of a split Monday Night Football doubleheader on October 21 with ABC and ESPN airing the other game. ESPN+'s exclusive games were distributed to business establishments via the ESPN+ for Business package on DirecTV. On December 9, ESPN+ and Disney+ streamed The Simpsons Funday Football, an alternate Monday Night Football broadcast that used the league's player tracking data to render a live animated version of the game portrayed by characters from The Simpsons.
Paramount+ simulcast in market and national CBS games.
Netflix streamed two Christmas games as part of a new three-year deal. EverPass Media distributed the games to businesses.
This was the second season out of a seven-year deal that the NFL Sunday Ticket out-of-market sports package streamed on YouTube TV, as well as on YouTube's Primetime Channels service as a standalone subscription option. DirecTV and EverPass Media also distributed NFL Sunday Ticket to business establishments.
The league's streaming service NFL+ continued to stream in-market regular season and postseason games on mobile devices only, radio broadcasts for all games, most out-of-market preseason games and a live stream of NFL Network on its base tier, and replays of games along with NFL RedZone on its premium tier.


==== Postseason ====
All four broadcast partners will air at least one Wild Card round game, with CBS and Fox airing an AFC and NFC Wild Card game, respectively. NBC will air the Sunday night game under the fourth year of its seven-year deal. ESPN/ABC will broadcast the Monday night Wild Card game, its fourth in a five-year deal. CBS will air a second game in the wild card round as part of its rotation with Fox and NBC; one of CBS' Wild Card games will have an alternative broadcast on Nickelodeon.
Amazon Prime Video will exclusively air a Wild Card playoff game for the first time during the 2024 season (it previously simulcast one CBS Wild Card playoff games on the platform in the 2021 and 2022 seasons), purchasing the rights to the game that was aired exclusively by Peacock last season.
This will be the second season that all four broadcast television partners air one divisional playoff game per season (ESPN/ABC, Fox, CBS, and NBC).
Fox will televise Super Bowl LIX in the annual rotation of Super Bowl broadcasters.


==== Personnel changes ====
Tom Brady began his broadcasting career as Fox's lead color commentator, working alongside Kevin Burkhardt. Brady replaced Greg Olsen, who joined Joe Davis on the #2 team. Other changes saw Daryl Johnston move to the #5 team with Kevin Kugler, Mark Sanchez joining Adam Amin on the #3 team, and Mark Schlereth assigned to the #6 team with Chris Myers. The #4 team of Kenny Albert and Jonathan Vilma remained intact, with Megan Olivi replacing Shannon Spake as that team's sideline reporter.
Longtime CBS analysts Phil Simms and Boomer Esiason departed The NFL Today after 26 and 22 years, respectively. They were replaced by J. J. Watt and Matt Ryan. Ryan, who previously worked with Andrew Catalon and Tiki Barber on the #4 team, was replaced by Jason McCourty on that team.


==== Most watched regular season games ====
All times Eastern.

TV networks include corresponding Spanish network broadcasts through Telemundo, Universo, ESPN Deportes, Fox Deportes, and SAP.
For regional windows (such as the late afternoon), viewership figures include across all regional games on the indicated network and timeslot (for single games this includes games aired in both the early and late slots).


== References ==