Kingdom Come: Deliverance II is a 2025 action role-playing game developed by Warhorse Studios and published by Deep Silver. The sequel to Kingdom Come: Deliverance (2018), the game was released for PlayStation 5, Windows, and Xbox Series X/S on 4 February 2025. It received generally favorable reviews and sold one million units within a day of its release.


== Gameplay ==
Kingdom Come: Deliverance II is an open-world action role-playing game in which the protagonist is controlled from a first-person perspective. Missions and objectives are able to be managed in different ways, with NPCs and communities reacting respectively. In turn, the reactions to the player character (PC) will influence his daily life and character development.
Unlike the beginning of its predecessor, Kingdom Come: Deliverance II does not start with Henry completely inexperienced and untrained. For the first time, the game features crossbows and early forms of firearms. The former can also be fired while riding.
The three skills Oratory, Charisma and Intimidation, that were applicable in dialogues with NPCs in the first game have been supplemented by Appearance, Coercion and Dominate.


== Synopsis ==


=== Setting ===
Kingdom Come: Deliverance II takes place in the year 1403 in the Kingdom of Bohemia, then part of the Lands of the Bohemian Crown and of the Holy Roman Empire, in what is now the Czech Republic. The game directly follows on from the end of Kingdom Come: Deliverance, and takes place in the "turmoil of a civil war", where Henry, the son of a blacksmith, will fight against the invading Sigismund, King of Hungary and Croatia and his allies. It will conclude Henry's story.

The game world of Kingdom Come: Deliverance II is twice as large as that of its predecessor. Instead of the latter's single connected world, the former encompasses two larger, freely explorable areas. One area is the Bohemian Paradise, a cultural landscape with lots of nature, while the other is the city of Kutná Hora (called by its original German name Kuttenberg in the game) and its surroundings. In the late Middle Ages, Kutná Hora was the second largest city in Bohemia after Prague, and one of the richest economic centers in the country due to silver mining and coinage.


=== Characters ===
The main character is Henry of Skalitz, the son of a blacksmith, turned knight in service of Sir Radzig Kobyla leading a resistance in favour of the imprisoned King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor Wenceslaus IV, against the usurper King Sigismund. In addition to his role as an envoy to Radzig, Henry seeks personal revenge against Sigismund and his emissaries. Henry is joined by the pompous nobleman Sir Hans Capon in his journey. Sir Istvan Toth, the main antagonist of the first game makes a reappearance, as well as King Sigismund of Luxembourg. Several other characters from the first game make an appearance, including the unconventional Father Godwin as well as the brash Lord Sir Hanush of Leipa.


=== Plot ===

Henry, accompanied by Sir Hans Capon and a small entourage leave Rattay to deliver a message to one of Sigismund's allies, Otto von Bergow, located at his estate in Trosky Castle, with a letter enquiring whether or not his allegiance to Sigismund has been shaken.


== Development and release ==

Development on Kingdom Come: Deliverance II began in July 2019, following the release of Kingdom Come: Deliverance and its downloadable content. While Warhorse Studios had 131 employees in 2019, it had grown to around 250 people by spring 2024 at the latest. Warhorse Studios wanted Kingdom Come: Deliverance II to be the game that Kingdom Come: Deliverance was supposed to be with their improved resources and experience. The game uses a heavily customised version of the CryEngine, with music composed by Czech composers Jan Valta and Adam Sporka. The protagonist, Henry, is again portrayed by the British actor Tom McKay. In addition, the expertise of various historians, universities and museums was again drawn on to represent a "realistic, immersive and believable medieval world". Unlike the development of Kingdom Come: Deliverance, the motion capture was supplemented by facial capture. Stunt riders also took part in the development of Kingdom Come Deliverance II. The game will be interspersed with a total of five hours of cutscenes and will also be accessible to those who have not played its predecessor.
According to lead developer Daniel Vávra, the game's script has 2.2 million words. The script of the previous record holder, Baldur's Gate 3, contains around two million words, according to Guinness World Records.
Kingdom Come: Deliverance II was announced and revealed in April 2024 in a recorded video set in St. Barbara's Church, Kutná Hora. The game was released for PlayStation 5, Windows, and Xbox Series X/S on 4 February 2025.


=== Versions ===
Kingdom Come: Deliverance II will be released in three retail versions; in addition to the base Standard Edition, Kingdom Come: Deliverance II will be available as a Gold Edition and Collector's Edition. The Gold Edition contains three DLCs/add-ons that will be released later, equipment for the protagonist and bonus content called "Shields of Seasons Passing", which will be released with the release of the base game. Both the Standard Edition and the Gold Edition are available via digital download and as a physical edition. Buyers of the Standard Edition can purchase the three expansions and the bonus content "Shields of Seasons Passing" online as a digital bundle offer. The Collector's Edition includes all the content of the Gold Edition and is supplemented by several merchandise items. All pre-orderers receive a bonus quest, "The Lion Crest", which in turn brings additional equipment for Henry.
In January 2025, the Saudi Arabian outlet VGA4A reported that the game would be refused classification and consequently banned in Saudi Arabia due to Warhorse Studio's refusal to alter the game's content to suit the countries media guidelines, namely the portrayal of a relationship between two male characters. However, a statement regarding the game has yet to be released by the Saudi General Authority of Media Regulation. The potential ban was denied by the creative director of the game, Daniel Vávra. Nonetheless, the country has previously banned Final Fantasy XVI and The Last of Us Part II for similar content related reasons. Journalists identified the game's forums included criticism of expanded same-sex romance options, the inclusion of the Mansa of Mali, and general complaints accusing the developer of becoming "woke".


=== Post-launch content ===
On 16 January 2025, Warhorse Studios revealed a DLC roadmap. After launch, the game would receive free improvements such as a barber feature, hardcore mode and horse racing. This would be followed along by additional paid DLC content Brushes with Death, Legacy of the Forge and Mysteria Ecclesiae over the course of 2025. The paid DLC would be included in an expansion pass called "Shields of Seasons Passing."


== Reception ==

Kingdom Come: Deliverance II received "generally favourable" reviews from critics, with a score of 88/100 on all platforms, according to the review aggregator website Metacritic. OpenCritic determined that 97% of critics recommended the game. Critics praised Kingdom Come: Deliverance II for its immersive open-world, role-playing game mechanics, and story.
Joshua Wolens of PC Gamer likened Kingdom Come: Deliverance II to other "system-heavy" games such as The Elder Scrolls III: Morrowind, stating that the game is a "ludicrously ambitious and peculiar thing that somehow fulfills its ambition and peculiarity." Wolens praised the game for its varied plot lines and activities, allowing the player to play as a soldier, spy, gambler or blacksmith.
In a more critical review, Eurogamer's Katharine Castle criticised some of the complexities of the game, lamenting the heavy use of text menus to explain mechanics further, and that cutscenes and interactions were excessively long or bloated. She also called the supporting cast as "murderable", particularly panning the character of Hans Capon.
Reviewers noted that the game performed to a high level of optimisation on release, with few noticeable bugs or technical issues. Brendan Lowry of Windows Central stated that "what Warhorse has built here undoubtedly stands tall as one of the most visually impressive games ever developed".
Some fans vocally objected to the inclusion of expanded same sex romance options for Henry. PR manager Tobias Stolz-Zwilling stated that he felt "fed up" with being caught in the culture war, emphasising that the studio's goal was to create a "rich, immersive historically accurate experience." 


=== Sales ===
On release day, Kingdom Come: Deliverance II topped the Steam top-sellers list. The game reached a peak concurrent player count on Steam of 159,351 players, beating Kingdom Come: Deliverance by more than 60,000 players. A day after release, it had sold one million units.


=== Accolades ===
Before its release, Kingdom Come: Deliverance II won Best PC Game Award at Gamescom 2024.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website