Jaylah Ji'mya Hickmon (born August 14, 1998), known professionally as Doechii (), is an American rapper and songwriter. She first gained attention on TikTok with the viral success of her 2020 song "Yucky Blucky Fruitcake". She later signed with Top Dawg Entertainment, in a joint venture with Capitol Records, and released the single "Persuasive", which was later remixed with SZA. Her 2023 single "What It Is (Block Boy)" (featuring Kodak Black) marked her first entry on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). 
Doechii's third mixtape, Alligator Bites Never Heal (2024), was met with generally favorable reviews and won Best Rap Album at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards; this made her the third woman to win in the category. The mixtape spawned the singles, "Denial Is a River" and "Nissan Altima". 
Doechii has made guest appearances on the single "Anxiety" by Sleepy Hallow, as well as the track "Balloon" by Tyler, the Creator. Her accolades include a Grammy Award (from three nominations) and the 2023 Rising Star Award from Billboard Women in Music. She has also received nominations for two MTV Video Music Awards, a BET Award, and two Soul Train Music Awards.  


== Early life ==
Jaylah Ji'mya Hickmon was born on August 14, 1998, in Tampa, Florida, where she was raised. Her father and uncle were both rappers, though only her father recorded professionally. She has younger twin sisters. She has described her upbringing as Christian. Doechii attended Howard W. Blake High School and grew up performing ballet, tap dancing, acting, cheerleading, doing gymnastics, and playing soccer. She planned to become a professional choral singer until a friend encouraged her to produce and release her music online as an independent artist.


== Career ==
She started writing poetry and rap in high school, and was making music by 2014. Doechii released her debut song "Girls" on SoundCloud in 2016 as Iamdoechii. She once sold hoodies with the phrase "Stay woke. Stay black." in protest of police brutality.
One of Doechii’s first projects, Coven Music Session, Vol. 1, was released in 2019, and her debut EP, Oh the Places You'll Go, was self-funded and released in 2020. It was described by Rolling Stone as a mix of pop, dance, and hip hop. "Yucky Blucky Fruitcake", a single from the EP released in September 2020, was inspired by her reading The Artist's Way and went viral on TikTok in 2021, earning her attention from record labels. Also in 2021, she released her second EP, Bra-Less; she was featured on Isaiah Rashad's song "Wat U Sed" from his album, The House Is Burning, which she performed with Rashad at the 2021 BET Hip Hop Awards; and was an opening act during SZA's 2021 tour. In March 2022, she was signed to Capitol Records by Chris Turner and Top Dawg Entertainment, making her the first female rapper on the latter label. That same month, she released "Persuasive", her first single published through Top Dawg, and appeared as a featured artist on David Guetta and Afrojack's song "Trampoline", alongside Missy Elliott and Bia.
In April 2022, she released the song "Crazy" with a music video. Her second EP and her first major label release, She / Her / Black Bitch, was released on August 5, 2022. Her July 2022 performance of her song "Persuasive" was nominated for Push Performance of the Year at the 2022 MTV Video Music Awards.
Doechii performed at the 22nd Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2023. Also in 2023, she made her acting debut in Earth Mama, a drama film directed by Savanah Leaf. 
In August 2024, Doechii released her third mixtape, Alligator Bites Never Heal, to critical acclaim. Pitchfork called it "her most ambitious and musically diverse release" filled with "playful and melodic sides without skimping on hard-hitting hip-hop". The mixtape won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards. 
In October 2024, Doechii featured on the song "Balloon" from Tyler, the Creator's album Chromakopia. Doechii also featured on Katy Perry's song "I'm His, He's Mine" from her album 143.
Doechii appeared as a guest judge on a January 2025 episode of RuPaul's Drag Race season 17, with her song "Alter Ego" featured in a lip-sync competition. The song's exposure in the episode resulted in significant chart increases across music streaming platforms.


== Achievements ==
Doechii was nominated for Best New Artist and Best Rap Performance, and won Best Rap Album for the 2025 Grammy Awards. She also received several nominations for the 2025 NAACP Image Awards, including Outstanding New Artist, Outstanding Female Artist, Outstanding Music Video/Visual Album, and Outstanding Album. Variety named her the 2024 Hitmakers Hip-Hop Disruptor of the Year.


== Musical style ==
Rolling Stone's Mankaprr Conteh described Doechii's rap delivery as "animated" and her song narratives as "quirky". Her music has been compared by critics to that of Nicki Minaj, Doja Cat, Missy Elliott, and Azealia Banks. She has described her music as alternative hip hop, and has cited Nicki Minaj, Lauryn Hill, Kanye West, Tyler, The Creator, Kendrick Lamar, and SZA as her major musical influences. She has also expressed admiration for artists including Trick Daddy, Grace Jones, Paramore, Madonna, KRS-One, and MF Doom.


== Personal life ==
Doechii currently resides in Los Angeles. She lived in New York City  before the COVID-19 pandemic, and  published YouTube vlogs about her daily life during that period. Doechii is bisexual. In a 2024 interview with Joe Budden, she disclosed that she recently became sober following years of heavy drinking.


== Discography ==

Mixtapes

Coven Music Session, Vol. 1 (2019)
Oh the Places You'll Go (2020)
Alligator Bites Never Heal (2024)
EPs

Bra-Less (2021)
She / Her / Black Bitch (2022)


== Tours ==
Headlining

Alligator Bites Never Heal Tour (2024)
Supporting

Doja Cat – The Scarlet Tour (2023)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==