Invincible is an adult animated superhero television series created by Robert Kirkman for the streaming service Amazon Prime Video, based on the Image Comics comic book series of the same name he co-created with Cory Walker and Ryan Ottley. It is produced by Skybound Entertainment, Wind Sun Sky Entertainment, Point Grey Pictures, and Amazon MGM Studios. The series follows teenager Mark Grayson and his transformation into a superhero under the guidance of his father, Nolan Grayson / Omni-Man, the most powerful superhero on the planet. During his transformation, Mark finds himself struggling between his personal life and superhero duties, and is forced to prove that he can be the hero that his father is, unaware that there's a sinister conspiracy going on that threatens the world, and will leave him questioning the true nature of his role. Steven Yeun stars in the series as Mark Grayson / Invincible alongside Sandra Oh and J. K. Simmons as Mark's mother and father, respectively, while the remaining cast members have recurring roles.
Invincible premiered its first season of eight episodes between March and April 2021. Following the season finale, Amazon renewed the series for a second and third season. A prequel special, Invincible: Atom Eve, was released in July 2023. The second season of eight episodes was divided into two parts, with the first part released in November 2023, and the second part from March to April 2024. The third season premiered on February 6, 2025. Three months after the second-season finale, Invincible was renewed for a fourth season.
The series has received acclaim from critics, with praise for its animation, action sequences, story, voice performances (particularly Yeun, Oh and Simmons), and emotional weight. 


== Premise ==
Mark Grayson is a seemingly normal teenager whose father Nolan is the most powerful superhero on the planet. Shortly after his 17th birthday, Mark begins to develop powers of his own and learns how to wield them with help from his father, who turns out to not be as heroic as he thought, as he hides a dark secret, which starts to slip when he brutally murders the members of the world's greatest superhero team, the Guardians of the Globe.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Markus Sebastian "Mark" Grayson / Invincible (voiced by Steven Yeun): The eponymous main character. After developing his powers at 17 years old, Mark discovers the harsh realities of being a superhero while struggling to define himself along with a berserker-esque rage that manifests as a result of his Viltrumite heritage.
Deborah "Debbie" Grayson (voiced by Sandra Oh): Mark's mother, Nolan's wife, Oliver's adoptive mother, and an experienced real estate agent who was once long adjusted to being a superhero's spouse.
Nowl-Ahn / Nolan Grayson / Omni-Man (voiced by J. K. Simmons): Mark and Oliver's father and Debbie's husband. Born on the planet Viltrum to a super-powered alien race known as the Viltrumites, Omni-Man's parents died in his youth before he joined the Viltrum Empire's intergalactic expansion several thousand years ago. After arriving on Earth 20 years prior to the series, Omni-Man is considered the most powerful superhero on the planet with a civilian identity of a rich travel writer.


=== Recurring ===
Samantha Eve Wilkins / Atom Eve / Phase One (voiced by Gillian Jacobs as a teen/young adult, Jazlyn Ione as a preteen, and Aria Kane as a child): A matter/energy manipulating superheroine, former member of the Teen Team, and an invitee of the new Guardians of the Globe roster who refuses to join the latter group after learning her teammate and ex-boyfriend Rex Splode cheated on her with teammate Dupli-Kate. Struggling to find self-meaning, she chooses to help people directly with humanitarian actions.
William Francis Clockwell (voiced by Andrew Rannells): Mark's openly gay best friend and civilian confidant.
Amber Justine Bennett (voiced by Zazie Beetz): Mark's insightful classmate and first girlfriend.
Global Defense Agency (GDA): A clandestine organization that organizes global superhero responses and uses advanced technology to expedite their recovery or resuscitation after death.
Cecil Stedman (voiced by Walton Goggins): The director of the GDA who possesses a long-range personal teleporter and inducts Invincible at the start of his hero career.
Donald Ferguson (voiced by Chris Diamantopoulos): A high-ranking GDA agent who serves directly under Cecil Stedman. After being killed by Omni-Man, his brain was transferred to a robotic endoskeleton made in his image and later realizes that he has died countless times.
April Howsam (voiced by Calista Flockhart): A GDA agent and nanny experienced with superhero children who was hired by Cecil to help Debbie take care of and tutor Oliver.
D.A. Sinclair (voiced by Ezra Miller (season 1), Eric Bauza (season 2)): A mad scientist with an obsession for "improving" humanity who, to this end, created zombified cyborg supersoldiers known as "Reanimen". After his Reanimen overwhelm Invincible, Cecil Stedman hires Sinclair to mass-produce more to fight Omni-Man and counter the Viltrum Empire's impending invasion.
Guardians of the Globe (new roster): A group of superheroes who were formerly of the Teen Team merged with other experienced heroes with diverse skill sets.
Rudolph "Rudy" Connors / Robot (voiced by Zachary Quinto as Robot and Rudy's original body, Ross Marquand as Rudy's cloned body, Jason Mantzoukas as a version of clone Rudy in the future): A deformed individual with a condition that causes outside air to burn his lungs who is forced to live in a pod, operates a series of drones and has a sizable personal fortune. Using "Robot", Connors formerly led the Teen Team before creating a new Guardians of the Globe roster. Amidst this, he uses Rex Splode's DNA and the Mauler Twins' expertise in cloning to make a new teenage body for himself before euthanizing his original body. In the second season, Connors is temporarily replaced by the Immortal as the Guardians' leader before resuming the role by the season's end.
The Immortal (voiced by Ross Marquand): A millennia-old superhero and former leader of the original Guardians who was once an unnamed Celtic warrior before he was exposed to a cosmic anomaly that rendered him functionally immortal unless he is decapitated. Over the years, he went on to fight in the Crusades and become Abraham Lincoln before forming the Guardians. In the first season, the Immortal is killed twice by Omni-Man, but the Mauler Twins revive him after his first death while the GDA helps him recover following his second death. In the second season, Immortal is assigned by Cecil Stedman to replace Robot as the new Guardians' leader, enters a relationship with fellow Guardian Dupli-Kate, and becomes distrustful of Invincible due to his experience with Omni-Man.
Rex Sloan / Rex Splode (voiced by Jason Mantzoukas): An incorrigible superhero who can charge potential energy into anything he touches to create explosives and a former member of the Teen Team who is selected to join the new Guardians roster. Following Omni-Man's betrayal, Rex matures and grows closer to the team.
Katherine "Kate" Cha / Dupli-Kate (voiced by Malese Jow): A self-replicating superheroine and former member of the Teen Team who is selected to join the new Guardians roster. All Kates are numbered, with the prime Kate being numbered "0". She also has a telepathic link with her doubles, which causes her to feel what they feel.
Rachel / Shrinking Rae (voiced by Grey Griffin): A size-manipulating superheroine who is selected to join the new Guardians roster.
Amanda / Monster Girl (voiced by Grey Griffin): A cursed superheroine whose powers allow her to transform into a powerful masculine ogre (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson), but gradually makes her younger each time she does so. She begins the series at 24 years old chronologically and 12 physically.
Markus Grimshaw / Black Samson (voiced by Khary Payton): An original Guardian from the team's early days who left after losing his powers. Donning an armored super-suit to continue as a hero, he joins the new roster as the veteran voice. After being hospitalized by Battle Beast, his powers return to accelerate his recovery and he shelves his armor.
Zandale Randolph / Bulletproof (voiced by Jay Pharoah): A superhero who is impervious to harm and can fly. He is invited by Cecil Stedman to join the Guardians of the Globe in the second season.
The Shapesmith (voiced by Ben Schwartz): A Martian with shapeshifting abilities who takes the place of astronaut Rus Livingston and masquerades as a human superhero, joining the Guardians in the second season.
The Mauler Twins (both voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson): Two blue-skinned, hyper-powerful, super-genius superhumans and long-time adversaries of the original Guardians. Despite their name, they are clones of each other with each claiming to be the original while the other is a clone.
Killcannon (voiced by Fred Tatasciore): A supervillain with an arm-mounted laser cannon and an enemy of Invincible and Atom Eve.
Arthur "Art" Rosenbaum (voiced by Mark Hamill): A superhero suit tailor and long-time friend to many superheroes, such as Omni-Man. After helping Debbie uncover the truth about Omni-Man, Art joins her in falling into a drunken depression.
Adam Wilkins (voiced by Fred Tatasciore): Eve's abusive adopted father who vocally disapproves of her being a superhero and wants her to be normal.
Elizabeth "Betsy" Wilkins (voiced by Grey Griffin): Eve's soft-spoken adopted mother who acts as a buffer between her husband and daughter.
Damien Darkblood (voiced by Clancy Brown): A demon detective who escaped from Hell to seek justice for others and save his soul and whose presence triggers a sudden cold in the ambient temperature. Cecil hires him to investigate Omni-Man before exiling him back to Hell to prevent him from exposing Omni-Man too early.
Rus Livingston (voiced by Ben Schwartz): An astronaut who traveled to Mars only to be possessed by Sequids after Shapesmith took his place.
Angstrom Levy (voiced by Sterling K. Brown): A man who can create portals to other dimensions. He gathers several alternate universe variants of himself in the hopes of adding their knowledge to his own and improving his world, only to be forced to end the process early, which leaves him with a mutated brain. Driven mad due to his variants' memories, he vows revenge on Invincible.
The Coalition of Planets: A collection of alien races who gathered together to fight the Viltrumites.
Allen the Alien (voiced by Seth Rogen): An assessor of member world candidates for the Coalition whose homeworld of Unopa was destroyed by the Viltrumites.
Thaedus (voiced by Peter Cullen): A rebel Viltrumite and the founder and leader of the Coalition.
Telia (voiced by Tatiana Maslany): Allen's girlfriend and a decorated general in the Coalition with a zero-tolerance policy for Viltrumite aggression.
Viltrum Empire: A race of alien conquerors from the planet Viltrum.
General Kregg (voiced by Clancy Brown): A high-ranking Viltrumite general.
Anissa (voiced by Shantel VanSanten): A high-ranking Viltrumite warrior and the most powerful female Viltrumite sent to check on Invincible's progress in taking over Earth.
Lucan (voiced by Phil LaMarr): A Viltrumite warrior.
Vidor (voiced by Chris Diamantopoulos): A Viltrumite warrior.
Thula (voiced by Grey Griffin): A long-lived Viltrumite warrior.
Oliver Grayson (voiced by Lincoln Bodin (season 2), Christian Convery (season 3)): The Viltrumite-Thraxan son of Omni-Man and Andressa, and Mark's younger half-brother. Due to his mother's DNA, he is a highly gifted learner and currently has pale purple skin while his father's Viltrumite physiology has drastically slowed his Thraxan aging and given him superhuman strength and durability.
Reporter (voiced by Gary Anthony Williams): An unnamed news reporter who brings up the current events on live television surrounding Invincible.


=== Guest ===
Steve (voiced by Jon Hamm): A Secret Service agent who guards the White House's front gate.
Matt (voiced by Max Burkholder): Steve's stepson.
Guardians of the Globe (original roster): A decades-old superhero team who are massacred by Omni-Man.
Holly / War Woman (voiced by Lauren Cohan): A powerful ancient warrior and co-benefactor of the Guardians.
Alana / Green Ghost (voiced by Sonequa Martin-Green): A superheroine encased in a green suit with ghost-like powers and successor to an unnamed male incarnation (voiced by Chris Diamantopoulos).
Martian Man (voiced by Chad L. Coleman): An exiled, shapeshifting Martian superhero.
Josef / Red Rush (voiced by Michael Cudlitz) A Russian speedster and the team's first responder.
Darkwing (voiced by Lennie James): A gadget-wielding caped crusader and co-benefactor of the Guardians.
Aquarus (voiced by Ross Marquand): A hydrokinetic, piscine humanoid and king of an underwater Atlantean kingdom.
Connie (voiced by Mae Whitman): War Woman's co-worker and business partner in the heroine's civilian identity.
B.N. Winslow (voiced by Reginald VelJohnson): The principal of Reginald VelJohnson High School who later becomes the dean of Upstate University.
Doc Seismic (voiced by Chris Diamantopoulos): A mad scientist who holds socially progressive views towards the U.S. government and its past leaders and wields earthquake-generating wristbands, which give him concussions every time he uses them.
Magmanites: An army of lava humanoids that Seismic gains control of.
Bi-Plane (voiced by Ross Marquand): A flight suit-empowered supervillain who attempted to destroy Denver, only to be thrown into outer space by the Immortal.
Kursk (voiced by Ross Marquand): A Russian electrokinetic supervillain.
Titan (voiced by Mahershala Ali (season 1), Todd Williams (season 3)): A criminal enforcer, later crime lord, who can manifest regenerative stone armor at will and feels that superheroes look down on him due to him and his family living in poverty. He initially works under Machine Head until the latter is arrested, allowing Titan to take over his criminal empire and work to protect people who are overlooked by superheroes.
Flaxans: A warrior race of aliens who seek to conquer Earth despite three failed attempts and Omni-Man attacking their planet.
Slash (voiced by Djimon Hounsou): The leader of the first three invasion forces who aims to kill Invincible for scarring him and conquer Earth before he is killed by Omni-Man.
Olga (voiced by Grey Griffin): Red Rush's widow and friend of Debbie Grayson.
Martian Emperor (voiced by Djimon Hounsou): The unnamed ruler of Mars.
Sequids: The parasitic aliens who have infested Mars enough for it to be quarantined from the rest of the galaxy.
Vanessa (voiced by Nicole Byer): Titan's wife.
Fiona (voiced by Nicole Byer): Titan's daughter.
Machine Head (voiced by Jeffrey Donovan): A cyborg crime lord with an auto-tuned voice, extensive illicit funding, and Titan's former boss.
Tether Tyrant (voiced by Reginald VelJohnson): A supervillain hired by Machine Head.
Thokk / Battle Beast (voiced by Michael Dorn): A space-faring leonine alien warrior who seeks to find worthy opponents to fight.
Rick Sheridan (voiced by Jonathan Groff (season 1), Luke Macfarlane (season 2 onwards)): William's love interest who is kidnapped and converted into a Reaniman by D.A. Sinclair before the GDA helps him recover.
Doug Cheston (voiced by Justin Roiland): A student at Upstate University who is kidnapped and converted into a Reaniman by D.A. Sinclair. He later commits suicide while fighting Invincible upon seeing himself.
Lizard League: A gang of lizard-themed supervillains.
Queen Lizard (voiced by Tatiana Maslany): The Lizard League's original leader.
King Lizard (voiced by Scoot McNairy as an adult, Jacob Tremblay as a child): The son of Queen Lizard who was formerly known as Prince Lizard and succeeded his mother as leader of the Lizard League.
Salamander (voiced by Phil LaMarr): A namesake-themed member.
Iguana (voiced by Malese Jow): A namesake-themed member.
Komodo Dragon (voiced by Jay Pharoah): A namesake-themed member.
Supreme Lizard (voiced by Fred Tatasciore): A Lizard League member who tried to take over while King Lizard was incarcerated until he is killed by him.
Kyle (voiced by Khary Payton): A nerdy frat boy who befriends Amber at Upstate University.
Dr. Elias Brandyworth (voiced by Stephen Root): A government scientist who created Atom Eve 18 years prior and secretly swapped her with the Wilkins' miscarried fetus to prevent the government from using her as a weapon. In the present, he and Eve's birth mother Polly are eventually killed by his superior Steven Erickson.
Polly (voiced by Grey Griffin): Eve's biological mother who was initially presumed dead after giving birth to Eve, but was secretly taken captive and experimented on by Steven Erickson, who later kills her.
Steven Erickson (voiced by Lance Reddick): A government agent who ordered Dr. Brandyworth to develop a weapon capable of transmuting anything. After Brandyworth left and kept Eve hidden from him, he made his new scientist, Dr. Rodgers, attempt to recreate Brandyworth's experiment, but ended up with deformed, degrading children. After he kills Brandyworth and Eve's biological mother, Polly, Eve uses her powers to erase Erickson's memories.
Dr. Rodgers (voiced by Chris Diamantopoulos): A government scientist and Steven Erickson's right-hand man.
Benjamin Taylor / Nightboy / Darkwing II (voiced by Cleveland Berto): Darkwing's former sidekick who possesses the ability to transport people to the "shadowverse" and took up Darkwing's mantle following his death.
Louise (voiced by Zehra Fazal): A civilian who lived in an apartment in Chicago with her daughter before it was destroyed.
Louise's Daughter (voiced by Micah Aliling): A girl who lived in an apartment in Chicago with her mom Louise before it was destroyed.
Paul (voiced by Cliff Curtis): Debbie's fellow real-estate agent.
The Giant (voiced by Fred Tatasciore): An orange-skinned giant cyclops with the mind of a child.
Queen Aquaria (voiced by Tatiana Maslany): The sole monarch of the Atlanteans and their undersea kingdom after her husband Aquarus was murdered by Omni-Man. A beloved leader who rules with an iron fin, she seeks retribution for her husband's death through unconventional means.
Catlin Stedman (voiced by Kari Wahlgren): A female alternate universe variant of Cecil.
Denise Ferguson (voiced by Kari Wahlgren): A female alternate universe variant of Donald.
Theo (voiced by Daveed Diggs): The widower of Green Ghost and member of a support group for superhero spouses. He briefly becomes acquainted with Debbie until he learns that she used to be married to Omni-Man and grows hostile towards her.
Carol (voiced by Lea Thompson): The therapist of a superhero spouse support group.
Thraxans: A race of insectoid aliens with accelerated aging.
Nuolzot (voiced by Rob Delaney): A shapeshifting insectoid alien from the planet Thraxa and one of Nolan's subjects.
Andressa (voiced by Rhea Seehorn): Nolan's second wife, an inhabitant of Thraxa, and the mother of Mark's half-brother Oliver.
Narrator (voiced by Paul F. Tompkins): The narrator for Mark's college trip and Allen's side mission.
Filip Schaff (voiced by Tim Robinson): The creator of Seance Dog. He is visually inspired by comic artist Ryan Ottley, who worked on the Invincible comics.
Agent Spider (voiced by Josh Keaton): A web-shooting superhero from an alternate universe whom Mark encounters while fighting Angstrom Levy. The character replaces Marvel Comics' Spider-Man, whom Invincible met briefly in the comic series.
Angstrom Jr. (voiced by Camden Coley): The son of one of Angstrom's variants who was killed by his universe's Invincible.
Jane (voiced by Ella Purnell): An archaeologist who uncovers the ancient Tomb of Ka-Hor in search of her father.
Riley (voiced by Chloe Bennet): Jane's friend and fellow archaeologist who possesses super-strength.
Fightmaster and Dropkick (both voiced by Xolo Maridueña): a duo of time-travelling thieves who came to the 21st Century to steal the Declaration of Independence.
Paul Cha / Multi-Paul (voiced by Simu Liu): Dupli-Kate's twin brother.
Knuckle Buster (voiced by Kari Wahlgren): a member of a radical terrorist organization that Cecil encountered in the past.
Force Fist (voiced by Chris Diamantopoulos): a member of a radical terrorist organization that Cecil encountered in the past.
Radcliffe (voiced by Bokeem Woodbine): Cecil's predecessor as director of the GDA.
Mister Liu (voiced by Tzi Ma): A crime lord who can shapeshifter into a dragon.
Scott Duvall / Powerplex (voiced by Aaron Paul): An electric-powered villain who seeks vengeance on Invincible for killing his sister.
Becky Duvall (voiced by Kate Mara): Scott's wife.
The Elephant (voiced by John DiMaggio): An Elephant themed villain.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2021) ===


=== Special (2023) ===


=== Season 2 (2023–24) ===


=== Season 3 (2025) ===


== Production ==


=== Development ===
A live-action film based on the Image Comics comic book series Invincible was revealed in April 2017 to be in development at Universal Pictures, with Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, who were fans of the comics, hired as the writers and directors. The duo were set to produce the film alongside James Weaver through their company Point Grey Pictures, while Invincible co-creator Robert Kirkman also joined to produce alongside David Alpert, Bryan Furst, and Sean Furst through his company Skybound Entertainment, which had a first-look deal with Universal for the film. However, when the series was announced, the film remained in hiatus, until on January 26, 2021, it was revealed that the film was still in development and would exist separately from the series. In a 2023 interview, Rogen stated that the animated series has had a strong influence on the live-action film version in development with Universal, which is essentially being developed as a live-action version of the animated series.
On August 11, 2017, Robert Kirkman signed a deal with Amazon to develop various series for Amazon Prime Video, with his company Skybound Entertainment. However, it was revealed that series that are already in production or development with other studios, will not be developed for Amazon. Kirkman revealed that he was interested on developing a series of the Invincible comic series, but that would not be possible at the moment because Universal was developing a film based on the comic series.
However, on June 19, 2018, it was announced that Amazon had given a series order to the project for a first season consisting of eight episodes. It was also revealed that the series would be animated and its episodes would be hourlong. Simon Racioppa serves as showrunner for the series and also serves as executive producer alongside Kirkman, David Alpert, and Catherine Winder. Production companies involved with the series include Skybound. Coincidentally, executive producers Evan Goldberg and Seth Rogen (who also provides a voice on the show) are working on a live-action film adaptation of the comic, which is separate from the animated series, as co-directors, writers, and producers.
On April 29, 2021, after the release of the final episode of the first season, Amazon renewed the series for a second and third season. In April 2023, series creator Robert Kirkman stated that the second season would focus on Angstrom Levy, a supervillain with access to multiple dimensions. In April 2024, Amazon was reported to have renewed the series for a fourth and fifth season, although IGN subsequently reported this was not accurate. In May 2024, Ross Marquand said that season 3 "is nearly finished" and is to be released in early 2025. In July 2024, Amazon officially renewed the series for a fourth season.


=== Casting ===
On January 31, 2019, the cast of the series was revealed, with Steven Yeun to portray Mark Grayson / Invincible and J. K. Simmons portraying Nolan Grayson / Omni-Man. Sandra Oh, Mark Hamill, Seth Rogen, Gillian Jacobs, Andrew Rannells, Zazie Beetz, Walton Goggins, Jason Mantzoukas, Mae Whitman, Chris Diamantopoulos, Malese Jow, Kevin Michael Richardson, Grey Griffin and Max Burkholder also joined the cast of the series. On July 18, 2020, Robert Kirkman confirmed the casting in a live video on Twitter.
Yeun and Oh are both of Korean descent. Oh's character Debbie Grayson was made to be Korean American in the animated adaptation, with her son Mark Grayson being half-Korean. Their Korean identity is not directly mentioned in the show, but a painting featuring Hangul (안녕, annyeong, 'hello') is depicted in the Grayson home. The decision came from a desire to increase diverse representations in the show. Similarly, Amber Bennett, Mark's girlfriend, was made an African American teenager in the adaptation. The character of William, Mark's best friend, is openly gay from the outset of the series in contrast to the comics, where he spends a significant amount of time closeted. 
In January 2025, it was announced that Aaron Paul, Simu Liu, Jonathan Banks, Kate Mara, Xolo Maridueña, John DiMaggio, Tzi Ma, Doug Bradley, and Christian Convery would join the voice cast for season 3.


=== Animation and title sequence ===
When the show was confirmed to be animated, it was confirmed that Wind Sun Sky Entertainment and its partner company, Skybound North, would be co-producing and animating the series.
Robert Kirkman praised the work of the show's animation studio, Maven Image Project. Kirkman noted in particular the Guardians' death at the end of episode 1, and the fight between Mark and Nolan in episode 8. Two additional animation studios were brought on for season 2 according to an interview with Margaret Dean.
The series title sequence is recognized by appearing right where a character would have said "Invincible" for the first time at each episode. However, the title sequence also becomes bloodier with each episode. Invincible's creator Robert Kirkman revealed that he wanted to represent the dark days that lie ahead by using the increasingly bloody title cards. Simon Racioppa revealed that he wanted each episode to be different from the previous ones to convince the audience to not skip it. The animation style borrows from the look of Saturday morning cartoons from the early 2000s.
The second season's title cards feature a similar progression, with a bloodied variant of the first season's title card cracking to uncover a black-and-blue design underneath. In season three, the title card glitches and changes colors in each episode.


=== Music ===
On December 2, 2020, it was revealed that John Paesano would be composing the score to the series.


== Release ==
After Amazon ordered the first season of the series, it was confirmed that the series would be consisting of eight episodes. On January 22, 2021, during a live-stream celebrating the 18th anniversary of Invincible #1, Kirkman revealed that the series would debut on March 25, 2021 (midnight EST), with the first 3 episodes. The remaining episodes would release weekly thereafter. On January 20, 2023, a teaser trailer was released, in which Steven Yeun and Seth Rogen as Invincible and Allen the Alien respectively discuss the upcoming season. During San Diego Comic-Con on July 21, 2023, a second trailer was shown, and it was announced that part one of the second season would premiere on November 3, 2023, with part two debuting on March 14, 2024. It was also announced that a special episode, called Invincible: Atom Eve, would release later that day. The third season premiered on February 6, 2025, with its first three episodes, before the remaining episodes are released weekly.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===

The series received critical acclaim, with praise for its animation, performances, and writing. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season of Invincible holds a 98% approval rating, based on 88 critic reviews, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The site's consensus reads: "With bold animation, bloody action, and an all-star cast led by the charming Steven Yeun, Invincible smartly adapts its source material without sacrificing its nuanced perspective on the price of superpowers." Metacritic reported a score of 73 out of 100 based on 16 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews" for the first season. The second season has an approval rating of 100% based on 41 reviews, with an average rating of 8.4/10. The site's consensus reads: "Still as bracing as a punch to the face and invigorating with its vivid worldbuilding, Invincible is practically impervious to disappointing audiences in this sterling sophomore season." On Metacritic, the season has a weighted average score of 82 out of 100, based on 13 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Ben Travers of IndieWire gave the show a B grade, stating that "Kirkman's adaptation is provocative, surprising, and sometimes challenging, as it constantly tries to disrupt the accepted ideas of its genre, whether that's the superhero genre, the teen drama genre, or the misguided notion that animation is a genre unto itself." Kathryn VanArendonk of Vulture states "the series has a palpable 'more of an eight-hour movie' thing going on, and the potential of that model is that it will all coalesce in the end into this glorious, big, transfixing story" but also adds that "the pitfall is that it makes these opening episodes a little weaker; there are so many characters happening here, so many story threads to put in place, that it's hard to know what to invest in as a viewer." Caroline Framke from Variety commented: "Now, of course, Kirkman is the wildly successful co-creator and executive producer of 'The Walking Dead,' so even those who might not have picked up an 'Invincible' comic might be interested in this spry, hourlong animated series that somehow manages to be both snarky and earnest within the same breath." William Hughes from The A.V. Club praised the series for its animation and stated: "Funny, exciting, and emotionally smart—seriously, Sandra Oh is killing it here—Invincible isn't bulletproof. But, like its increasingly burdened hero, it's trying. And sometimes, in the superhero game, that's all you can really do." Bob Strauss from Datebook praised the show, commenting: "While you can't describe 'Invincible' as gritty, it does feel like the right kind of animated super-show for an era marked by Zack Snyder's dark-hued 'Justice League' reconstruction and Amazon's own, ultra-pathological take on the genre, 'The Boys.' It's as clean-looking as any program we grew up with, but it has the dirtier stuff we secretly wanted."
Siddhant Adlakha of IGN gave the first season an 8 out of 10, stating the season "is great, thanks to its unique action and strong character-centric gravitas" and that the show "combines familiar superhero tropes with unexpected gore and moving character dynamics, resulting in the year's most surprising superhero series." Alan Sepinwall from Rolling Stone stated: "As the series moves along, Kirkman and company begin introducing twists to what we think is the formula — perhaps too many. Even within three episodes, the number of reversals and secrets pile so high that it can be hard to invest in certain characters and scenes, rather than trying to guess what will come next." Roxana Hadadi from RogerEbert.com praised the series for its story and animation, commenting: "'Invincible' sets up those questions quickly and engagingly in these first three installments, wraps them in a mystery, and then splatters them with blood. It's not an entirely new approach for this genre, but the familiarity of 'Invincible' is forgivable in light of the confidence that both Kirkman and Yeun bring to the material. They're the reason to watch." Niv M. Sultan from Slant Magazine gave the first season 3.5 stars of 4, and commented "Invincible recaptures what our current glut of superhero fiction largely loses sight of: the pleasure that superheroes must feel when wielding their powers. Not the sacred satisfaction of helping the downtrodden, but the id-centered thrills of soaring through the sky and inflicting hurt on those deemed deserving." Louis Chilton from The Independent gave the series 3 stars of 5 and stated "Invincible often seems derivative; perhaps its ideas were more groundbreaking in the original early-2000s comics. Some of its characters are unapologetic parodies (the Batman facsimile "Darkwing", for example), and you could easily go through picking out elements or story ideas that have cropped up in Watchmen, or The Incredibles, or Sky High, or Misfits. But there are still some good bones to its premise, and just enough subversiveness to let you ignore the fact this is a story you've seen a hundred times before."


=== Accolades ===


=== In other media ===
The eighth episode of the series' first season spawned a popular Internet meme called "Think, Mark". A 2022 promotional episode of the web series Death Battle! pit Invincible's Omni-Man against The Boys' Homelander, with Amazon Studios' Head of Marketing Adam Bersin having partnered with Rooster Teeth to promote their series, previously including the second season of The Boys, also produced by Amazon. Consequently, both Omni-Man and Homelander were made available as playable characters in the 2023 video game Mortal Kombat 1, with J. K. Simmons reprising his role as the former. In November 2023, a role-playing video game titled Invincible Presents: Atom Eve was released; the game is loosely based on the animated series' continuity with some alterations and a new original story. In February 2024, a mobile game RPG called Invincible: Guarding the Globe was released. In April 2024, Skybound was revealed to be internally developing an AAA video game based on Invincible. Over 30 employees were working on the game, which included industry veterans who had worked for Electronic Arts, Activision Blizzard, and AMZ Games, while a fundraiser campaign was also being established.


=== Lawsuit ===
Invincible creator Robert Kirkman was sued by comic book colorist William Crabtree, citing a rights and profits concern, on January 10, 2022. The case was settled on January 25, 2024.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website  on Amazon Prime Video
Official website at Skybound.com
Invincible at IMDb 
Invincible on Twitter
Invincible on Instagram
Invincible at Comic Vine