The 2025 4 Nations Face-Off is an international ice hockey tournament scheduled to take place on February 12–20, 2025, in Montreal, at Bell Centre, and in Boston, at TD Garden. Hosted by the National Hockey League (NHL) and featuring only NHL players, the 4 Nations Face-Off will temporarily replace the NHL's annual All-Star Game for 2025. In the tournament, teams representing Canada, Finland, Sweden, and the United States will play each other in a round-robin format, followed by a one-game final between the two top-placed teams.


== Background ==

The 2025 4 Nations Face-Off was announced at a press conference at the 2024 NHL All-Star Game on February 2, 2024, by NHL commissioner Gary Bettman. Also present at the press conference were NHL Players' Association (NHLPA) executive director Marty Walsh and four NHL players: Connor McDavid (Canada), Sebastian Aho (Finland), Elias Pettersson (Sweden), and Auston Matthews (United States).
At the press conference, Bettman announced plans for NHL participation in international best-on-best tournaments in coming years. In 2025, players will participate in the 4 Nations Face-Off, a tournament between NHL players representing Canada, Finland, Sweden, and the United States. The NHL 4 Nations Faceoff would happen in lieu of the 2025 NHL All-Star Game. Bettman stated that NHL players would play in the 2026 and 2030 Winter Olympics, after they had not been released for the 2018 and 2022 tournaments. Bettman also stated the league would host the next World Cups of Hockey in 2028 and 2032, with the most recent edition having been held in 2016.

At the time of the tournament's announcement, all participating teams were ranked in the top six by ice hockey's worldwide governing body, the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF): Canada (1), Finland (2), United States (4) and Sweden (6). Germany, while ranked fifth, did not have enough NHL players to create a roster. Though they had enough NHL players to create a roster, Russia and Czechia—ranked third and eighth, respectively—were not included in the tournament, with Russia specifically excluded due to the ban imposed on it by the IIHF for its ongoing war in Ukraine. Czech forward David Pastrnak called the omission of Czechia a "huge disappointment", though he said he understood there was limited time to organize the tournament. In early reporting on the tournament's format, journalist Greg Wyshynski wrote that the competition could not be considered best-on-best due to the omission of players from other ice hockey powers.


== Venues ==
The league did not initially announce the tournament venues, but stated that there would be two, one in Canada and one in the United States. The league confirmed on June 8 that the venues would be Bell Centre in Montreal and TD Garden in Boston, after months of reports by various media sources.


== Tournament structure ==
Two practice days, February 10 and 11, will be held prior to the tournament. During February 12–20, seven total games will be played. The tournament will be held in a round-robin format. Each team will play three games, and the two teams with the most points will advance to a one-game final.
Games will be played on NHL-sized rinks, following NHL rules. For round-robin games, overtime will be held in a 10-minute, 3-on-3 sudden-death period, followed by a three-round shootout. In the final, overtime will be held in consecutive 20-minute, 5-on-5 sudden-death periods.

Tiebreakers
Teams are ranked according to points earned (3 points for a regulation win, 2 points for an overtime or shootout win, 1 point for an overtime or shootout loss, 0 points for a regulation loss). If tied on points, tiebreakers would be applied in the following order:

Head-to-head result (only if tie between two teams);
Total regulation wins;
Total regulation and overtime wins;
Total goal difference;
Total goals scored;
Goal difference among tied teams;
Goals scored among tied teams;
Most even strength goals for among tied teams;
Fewest even strength goals against among tied teams.


== Teams ==
Teams will each consist of 23 players: 20 skaters (forwards and defencemen) and 3 goaltenders. Players are selected by their respective governing bodies: Hockey Canada, the Finnish Ice Hockey Association, the Swedish Ice Hockey Association and USA Hockey. The tournament is restricted to players who have a 2024–25 NHL contract and are on an NHL roster as of December 2, 2024. Because the NHL does not have an agreement with the IIHF for the 4 Nations Face-Off, the tournament cannot include non-NHL players.
On June 28, 2024, the NHL announced the first six players on each team's roster. The remaining players were announced on December 4, with the complete rosters of Team Sweden and Team Finland announced at 2:00 p.m. ET on the NHL Network and ESPN's SportsCenter, and the complete rosters of Team USA and Team Canada  announced at 6:30 p.m. during pregame broadcasts on Sportsnet, TNT, and TVA Sports.  Initially, no players from the Seattle Kraken or Washington Capitals were selected to participate in the Face-Off; however, the Kraken gained a representative when they acquired Finland's Kaapo Kakko from the New York Rangers on December 18, 2024.  About a week before the Face-Off, the San Jose Sharks also lost their representation in the event by trading Mikael Granlund to the Dallas Stars, making the Capitals and Sharks the only two teams currently expected to not appear in the Face-Off.


=== Canada ===
In April 2024, it was announced that Don Sweeney and Jim Nill were appointed by Doug Armstrong as Canada's general manager and associate general manager, respectively. Both were also named assistant general managers for the 2026 Olympic team. On June 25, Jon Cooper was named Canada's head coach for both the 4 Nations Face-Off and 2026 Winter Olympics. Rick Tocchet, Bruce Cassidy, and Peter DeBoer will join Cooper as assistant coaches for the 4 Nations Face-Off. On December 4, 2024, the entire roster for Canada was released. On January 26, 2025, defenseman Alex Pietrangelo withdrew from the tournament; and was replaced by Drew Doughty. On January 30, 2025, Team Canada named Sidney Crosby as its team captain for the 4 Nations Face-Off; the alternate captains will be Cale Makar and Connor McDavid.


=== Finland ===
Jere Lehtinen is the general manager, and his assistants are Mikko Koivu and Jarmo Kekalainen.
Antti Pennanen is the head coach. Tuomo Ruutu is the assistant coach. On December 4, 2024, the entire roster for Finland was released. On January 30, 2025, Aleksander Barkov was named captain for Team Finland; Sebastian Aho, Mikael Granlund, and Mikko Rantanen were named alternate captains. Also on the 30th, defenseman Miro Heiskanen was ruled out of the tournament due to injury. On February 2, he and defenseman Jani Hakanpaa, who was also injured, were replaced by Urho Vaakanainen and Henri Jokiharju. On February 9, Rasmus Ristolainen was ruled out due to injury and will be replaced by Nikolas Matinpalo.


=== Sweden ===
The general manager for Sweden will be Anders Lundberg. Sam Hallam will be the head coach. Daniel Alfredsson will serve as an assistant coach. On December 4, 2024, the full roster for Sweden was released. On January 29, 2025, goaltender Jacob Markstrom withdrew from the tournament due to injury, and was replaced by Samuel Ersson. On February 3, forward William Karlsson also withdrew due to injury, and was replaced by Rickard Rakell.
On January 30, Victor Hedman was named team captain for Team Sweden; Mattias Ekholm, Erik Karlsson, and William Nylander were selected as alternate captains.


=== United States ===
In February 2024, Bill Guerin was announced as general manager of the United States team for the 4 Nations Face-Off and 2026 Winter Olympics. In May, Mike Sullivan was named head coach of the team for both competitions. John Hynes, John Tortorella, and David Quinn are the assistant coaches. On December 4, 2024, the entire roster for the United States was released. On January 30, 2025, Auston Matthews was named captain for Team USA; Charlie McAvoy and Matthew Tkachuk were chosen as its alternate captains. On February 9, Quinn Hughes withdrew from the tournament due to a lower-body injury and was replaced by Jake Sanderson.


== Results ==


=== Round-robin ===


=== Final ===


== Media rights ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
McBride, Jim (February 10, 2025). "NHL players felt strongly about representing their countries. The league listened, and the 4 Nations Face-Off was born". The Boston Globe. Retrieved February 10, 2025.


== External links ==
Official website