Jeffrey Lance Baena (; June 29, 1977 – January 3, 2025) was an American screenwriter and film director. Baena began his career as a screenwriter, co-writing the 2004 comedy film I Heart Huckabees and, around the same time, seeing his script for Life After Beth enter production before being shelved. Baena, as an independent filmmaker, then expanded to directing and filmed Life After Beth as his directorial debut, starring Aubrey Plaza and released in 2014. Working with producer Liz Destro, and reuniting with Plaza as well as an expanding group of frequent collaborators, Baena was then writer-director for Joshy (2016) and The Little Hours (2017), which both became critically acclaimed and found a cult audience.
Among the performers in these films was Alison Brie, with whom Baena struck up a writing partnership and created works produced by Duplass Brothers Productions. They made the 2020 psychological drama film Horse Girl together, Baena's most commercial film, followed by the television anthology series Cinema Toast (2021) and Baena's final film, 2022's Spin Me Round. His first films saw Baena implement his post-mumblecore style as an improvisation-heavy filmmaker, and his films co-written with Brie are marked by exploration of expectations in film form.


== Early life and education ==
Jeffrey Lance Baena was born on June 29, 1977, to Barbara (later Stern) and Scott Baena, and grew up in a secular Jewish family in Miami, Florida. His family was from New York City, and had moved to Miami due to his father's work as a lawyer. Baena's parents were divorced, which he credited in part with informing his dark sense of comedy. His first stepmother was manic depressive, and under Florida's Baker Act was frequently institutionalized but then released, with Baena later commenting on systemic challenges in mental health care. He had a brother and two step-siblings.
After Killian High School in Kendall, Florida, Baena graduated from the New York University Tisch School of the Arts with a degree in film, before moving to Los Angeles to pursue directing. He, without really intending, achieved a minor in medieval studies at NYU after taking multiple classes when he "was hard-core into the alchemy shit", and also took classes relating to philosophy.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
Baena became a production assistant for filmmaker Robert Zemeckis on What Lies Beneath and Cast Away (both 2000). After working with Zemeckis, Baena became an assistant editor for writer-director David O. Russell. After a year and a half of working together, a minor car accident injured one of Baena's eyes. Partially to keep his spirits up and pass the time during his recovery, Russell began discussing story ideas with Baena. The two ended up collaborating on four scripts together, including I Heart Huckabees, which Russell directed in 2004, and Jay Roach's Meet the Fockers (also 2004), for which they made uncredited revisions.: 146–147  The philosophical I Heart Huckabees was not a commercial success, but quickly became a cult hit, and received praise for the ambition in its storytelling.
In 2012, Baena played a version of himself in the film The End of Love; a dramatisation of actor Mark Webber's life, Baena appeared alongside Aubrey Plaza, his partner and Webber's Scott Pilgrim vs. the World co-star.


=== Directorial debut and producing with Destro ===
Baena had planned for the comedy-drama Joshy to be his directorial debut, but actor and collaborator Adam Pally had to postpone for personal reasons. Baena then decided to work on the zombie comedy Life After Beth, from a script he started writing in 2003, which became his debut. This film had been in production but shelved shortly after it was written, and was only picked back up after comic actress Aubrey Plaza was looking for a role and her agent remembered the script; with Plaza attached, the production resumed. Flavorwire wrote that "Baena's control of the material is occasionally uncertain", while Mark Kermode felt Baena "kept things just the right side of believable, eschewing explanation in favour of cracked domesticity." Life After Beth received mixed reviews; the Rotten Tomatoes (RT) critics' consensus suggested the idea was too thin to sustain a whole film, though bolstered by Plaza's performance. In 2016, it was ranked the 38th best ever zombie film and described as both "the best zom-rom-com since Shaun Of The Dead" and a "mumblecore relationship break-up zomcom". It premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2014, the same festival at which Joshy, as Baena's second film, premiered in 2016.
When production resumed on Joshy, Baena provided his large comedic cast with a 20-page outline, rather than a script, as an experiment to "keep people in the moment." Baena did not audition but cast people he knew would be able to work in such a film. The film's RT critics' consensus highlighted Baena's direction for "strik[ing] a unique, disarmingly heartfelt blend of dark humor and tragedy". The Los Angeles Times praised that despite its improvisational nature, "the film never feels unfocused or messy"; Christy Lemire felt Baena's work had improved since his debut; and Glenn Kenny noted Baena's skill in tonally dictating his film. Joshy was ranked the fifth best ever mumblecore film separately by screenwriter Jason Hellerman and critic Mike Bedard, with Bedard also describing it as "post-mumblecore".
Jake Johnson as well as some of Baena's filmmaker friends had main parts in Joshy; the previous year, Baena had similarly made a cameo in Johnson's 2015 film Digging for Fire, the premise of which was based on the strange things found when Johnson, Baena and friends had dug out Johnson's garden. Joshy was also Baena's first film to feature actress Alison Brie, albeit briefly, before she had a main role in The Little Hours. Baena's third film, a 2017 black comedy, The Little Hours also starred Plaza; he wrote in a Reddit AMA that he "made this movie for [Plaza]", for whom it was her producing debut alongside Liz Destro of Destro Films. Destro had produced Baena's previous films, with Baena only starting development of The Little Hours after pitching it to her. Inspired by passages from The Decameron, which Baena had studied, the film was again largely improvised and based in the disconnect of medieval beliefs to modern ones; Baena saw the potential for humor and tragedy in this idea. Reviews were impressed with how well the concept worked, and praised Baena's comedic direction, with Mick LaSalle writing that "Baena combines a zany comic vision with a rare control of tone. [...] There's no winking or nudging, no straining for laughs. Baena devised the material, and he trusts it."


=== Creative partnership with Alison Brie ===
Baena directed Brie two more times in the films Horse Girl (2020) and Spin Me Round (2022), which they co-wrote together. The latter also featured Plaza. Both actresses were involved in different capacities in Baena's only television work, Cinema Toast, a 2021 anthology series that he created and executive produced. Baena wrote and directed episodes in the series, which reinterpreted public domain footage to tell modern stories. Baena and Brie were among the producers for Cinema Toast and both of their co-written films, all of which were executive produced by the Duplass Brothers.

Having formed a friendship after working on previous movies, and knowing of the creative risks Baena liked to take, Brie pitched the idea for a drama about fear of mental illness to him while on a hike. He had been suggesting that she play a "horse girl" character, and they realized they could combine the ideas to create what became Horse Girl. The pair pitched it to the Duplass Brothers, who joined and offered it to Netflix. Baena and Brie wrote the screenplay together, and some of the film's dialogue was improvised. After premiering at Sundance in 2020, Horse Girl began streaming on Netflix and was the most commercially successful of Baena's works. Reviews noted the use and subversion of form to inform the story, which was generally praised but also criticized by Adrian Horton in The Guardian.
The pair again chose to subvert expectations in Spin Me Round, the shoot of which was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy. They used the delay to expand the film outline into a more detailed script. The film combined comedy and thriller genres, and critics noted the story for "a provocative #MeToo statement". Spin Me Round saw mixed reviews, its RT critics' consensus saying that "it never quite lives up to its potential" but is nevertheless enjoyable and elevated by Plaza and Brie. The Hollywood Reporter felt it was "amusing but the most lightweight" of Baena's films.


=== Style ===
Baena's films found a cult audience, and critics appreciated the attention and care Baena gave to topics that were not frequently tackled in Hollywood films: Baena's films broadly deal with themes of grief, loss, love and mental health. In his own words, he described them as "destabilizing, unmoored, and full of chaos". Despite some similarities – his first two directorial efforts, Life After Beth and Joshy, are comedies that explore how a character copes after the death of their partner – and Baena's films all sharing "some unforeseen emotional kick", Ryan Gilbey wrote in an obituary for The Guardian that "the subjects and styles were strikingly dissimilar, a fact on which [Baena] prided himself" as he did not want to do the same thing again. Baena enjoyed creative freedom to mix genres and expectations.
He "never really audition[ed], ever" for his films, saying he was inspired by Federico Fellini choosing performers based on seeing them in a more natural setting than a line reading. Baena created ideas of characters then, once he knew which actors he would use, would "try to build the part around them, and ... make it more true." He ended up with a group of frequent collaborators, particularly Brie, Plaza and Molly Shannon (who each starred in four of his five films), as well as Pally, John C. Reilly, Lauren Weedman, Fred Armisen, Paul Reiser and Debby Ryan – Baena said this was primarily because he enjoyed working with them and always wanted to bring out new things from actors he enjoyed. He also found it advantageous to work with familiar actors due to his own "slightly nontraditional way" of writing and directing, so that he could rely on performers who understood his process. Baena typically wrote and worked from film outlines, rather than full screenplays, so his films could incorporate improvisation, though his first and final films, Life After Beth and Spin Me Round, were more traditional. He was considered one of the prominent filmmakers of the mumblecore subgenre.


== Personal life and death ==

Baena was renowned for the game nights he hosted, creating a social environment among filmmakers and friends that was reflected on his film sets. He met actress Aubrey Plaza during a game night in 2011, and they began dating. In 2021, on their tenth anniversary, they were married in a small ceremony in their backyard.
On January 3, 2025, Baena's body was discovered at his home in Los Angeles by his assistant, and he was pronounced dead at the scene. He was 47. The Los Angeles County medical examiner reported the cause of death as suicide by hanging. The 82nd Golden Globe Awards ceremony was held on January 5, with Best Director winner Brady Corbet paying tribute to Baena at the end of his acceptance speech; Plaza had been set to present at the ceremony but pulled out.


== Filmography ==
Film

Acting roles

Television


== References ==


== External links ==
Jeff Baena at IMDb