Chhaava (lit. transl. Lion's Cub) is an upcoming Indian Hindi-language historical epic action film based on the life of Maratha king Chatrapati Sambhaji Maharaj, played by Vicky Kaushal. It is an adaptation of the Marathi novel Chhava by Shivaji Sawant. Directed by Laxman Utekar and produced by Dinesh Vijan under Maddock Films, the film also stars Rashmika Mandanna and Akshaye Khanna.
Pre-production began in April 2023 and filming commenced in October 2023 and ended in May 2024. The film score and soundtrack album are composed by A. R. Rahman while the lyrics are written by Irshad Kamil. It is scheduled for a theatrical release on 14 February 2025 in IMAX formats.


== Cast ==
Vicky Kaushal as Chhatrapati Sambhaji Maharaj
Rashmika Mandanna as Maharani Yesubai
Akshaye Khanna as Aurangzeb
Ashutosh Rana as Sarsenapati Hambirao Mohite
Divya Dutta as Soyarabai
Vineet Kumar Singh as Kavi Kalash
Diana Penty as Zinat-un-Nissa Begum, Aurangzeb's daughter
Santosh Juvekar as Rayaji Malge
Neil Bhoopalam as Muhammad Akbar
Pradeep Rawat as Yesaji Rao Kank
Nilkanti Patekar as Dharau
Suvrat Joshi
Rohit Pathak as Kakad Khan


== Production ==


=== Development and pre-production ===
"Everyone knows about Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, but no one knows about Chatrapati Sambhaji Maharaj. He had such great courage and was a great warrior, but sadly no one knows about it. During the pandemic [COVID-19], when I read about Sambhaji Maharaj, I realised he is such a big character, and why are we not talking about his life? That's when I started writing and the idea of Chhaava came to me."
In 2021, Laxman Utekar told Dinesh Vijan that he wanted to make a film with Vicky Kaushal and Rashmika Mandanna. In December 2022, it was reported that Utekar was working on a historical biopic, based on the Marathi novel Chhava by Shivaji Sawant. After completing script in January 2023, pre-production for the film began in April, and principal photography starting in October. 
Utekar and his team spent a year researching the 17th-century Maratha era, traveling to historical towns like Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar, Ratnagiri, Pune, Nashik, and Paithan. Costume designer Sheetal Sharma sourced authentic Paithani sarees and restored 500-year-old borders for Rashmika Mandanna's character, Yesubai. The sourcing process included visits to Paithan and Narayanpeth to obtain authentic Pathani and Narayanpeth sarees. Additional accessories were gathered from Kolhapur, Sawantwadi, and Ratnagiri. Subrata Chakraborty and Amit Ray recreated jewellery and the sword Bhavani, drawing references from museums in London. Vicky Kaushal's portrayal of Sambhaji was based on historical busts and statues to ensure accuracy. A. R. Rahman was roped in to compose the score.
The film was officially announced on 3 October 2023, when Maddock Films revealed its upcoming slate of theatrical releases, including the release date for Chhaava.


=== Casting and filming ===
Laxman Utekar discussed his upcoming film with Vicky Kaushal during the shoot of Zara Hatke Zara Bachke (2023). In January 2023, Utekar confirmed that Kaushal would portray Sambhaji, marking their second collaboration following Zara Hatke Zara Bachke. Kaushal would be reportedly receiving a ₹10 crore remuneration. Utekar mentioned that Kaushal would undergo four months of training in sword fighting, horse riding, and that shooting would begin once they were satisfied with his preparation. In August 2023, it was reported that Marathi actor Santosh Juvekar would play a pivotal role in the film. He was originally cast as Ganoji Shirke, but later, director Laxman Utekar met with him in his office and offered him the role of Rayaji Malge instead. During the same month, Juvekar and Kaushal underwent horse riding training in the Mumbai suburbs. During trailer launch, Kaushal revealed that he was trained in sword, stick, and spear fighting for 6-7 months. He also gained 25 kg weight for the role. During shooting in Raigad a set was constructed for the scene depicting Chhatrapati Sambhaji's ascension to the throne, featuring an eight-sided throne. 
By October 2023, it was reported that Kaushal had started his preparations for the film alongside co-star Rashmika Mandanna. Mandanna would be reportedly receiving ₹4 crore remuneration. The same month, Ashutosh Rana and Divya Dutta join cast as Hambirrao Mohite and Soyarabai, respectively. Rana would be reportedly receiving 80 lakh remuneration. Dutta later discussed her portrayal in an interview with Mid-Day in December 2024. On 4 December 2023, Pradeep Rawat joined the film's cast. Mandanna wrapped up her portion of filming in January 2024, while Kaushal resumed filming in Wai on 9 March 2024, continuing until 6 April 2024. On 23 April 2024, Santosh Juvekar completed his portions. 
Earlier in the production process, the team had approached Anil Kapoor for the role of Aurangzeb, but in October 2023, Akshaye Khanna joined the cast in the role instead. Principal photography for the film wrapped in May 2024. Initially, Utekar had approached Marathi actor Ashok Shinde for a negative role, but Shinde declined the offer due to a scheduling conflict with his existing contract with Zee, as he revealed in a November 2024 interview with ItsMajja.


== Marketing ==
The teaser of the film was showcased before the preview shows of Stree 2, and was later released on social media on 19 August 2024, coinciding Raksha Bandhan. The film's trailer was released on 22 January 2025.


== Music ==
The music of the film is composed by A. R. Rahman while the lyrics are written by Irshad Kamil. The first single titled "Jaane Tu" was released on 31 January 2025. The second single titled "Aaya Re Toofan" was released on 6 February 2025.


== Release ==
Initially set to release on 6 December 2024, the film was later postponed to 14 February 2025. The film will simultaneously release in Russia.
Following backlash from certain Maharashtrian political figures for featuring a scene in the trailer in which Sambhaji and his wife perform lezim dance, Utekar decided to delete the sequence from the film.


== References ==


== External links ==
Chhaava at IMDb
Chhaava at Bollywood Hungama