"The Revolution Will Not Be Televised" is a satirical poem and Black Liberation song by Gil Scott-Heron. Scott-Heron first recorded it for his 1970 album Small Talk at 125th and Lenox, on which he recited the lyrics, accompanied by congas and bongo drums. A re-recorded version, with a 3 piece band, was the B-side to Scott-Heron's first single, "Home Is Where the Hatred Is", from his album Pieces of a Man (1971). This recording was still sparsely instrumented, but now, in addition to drums, featured a driving bassline played by Jerry Jemmott and, somewhat unconventionally, a jazz-infused flute line by Hubert Laws throughout, acting as a countermelody to Heron's passionately delivered spoken word vocal. This sparse and rhythm-driven backdrop to Heron's incisive vocal, held down by Bernard Purdie's tight and explosive funk drumming, and eschewing thick chordal accompaniment, foreshadowed musical developments in hip-hop in the decade to come.
It was also included on his compilation album, The Revolution Will Not Be Televised (1974). All these releases were issued on the Flying Dutchman Productions record label.
The song's lyrics either mention or allude to several television series, advertising slogans and icons of entertainment and news coverage that serve as examples of what "the revolution will not" be or do. The song is a response to the spoken-word piece "When the Revolution Comes" by The Last Poets, from their eponymous debut album, which opens with the line "When the revolution comes some of us will probably catch it on TV".
It was inducted to the National Recording Registry in 2005.
In 2021, it was ranked at No. 258 on Rolling Stone's "500 Greatest Songs of All Time". In 2025, the publication ranked the song at number 14 on its list of "The 100 Best Protest Songs of All Time."


== Cultural references in the poem ==
Each verse has several cultural references:

"Plug in, turn on, and cop out", a reference to Timothy Leary's pro-LSD phrase "Turn on, tune in, drop out."
"Skag", term for heroin
"Pigs", term for police
"Process", term for using chemicals to straighten a Black person's hair 
Xerox, best-known manufacturer (at the time of the poem's writing) of photocopying machines
Richard Nixon, 37th president of the United States
John N. Mitchell, U.S. Attorney General under Nixon
General Creighton Abrams, one of the commanders of military operations in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War
Mendel Rivers, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee during the period of the Vietnam War (Rivers' name appears in the original 1970 recording, but not in the re-recorded 1971 version, being replaced by Spiro Agnew)
Spiro Agnew, 39th vice president of the United States under Nixon
"Hog maws", sometimes misheard as "hog moss", soul food made from the stomach of a pig
Schaefer Award Theatre, an anthology of theatrical films that aired on several U.S. TV stations
Natalie Wood, film actress
Steve McQueen, film actor
Bullwinkle, cartoon character
Julia, the lead character on the half-hour television sitcom series Julia starring Diahann Carroll.
"Give your mouth sex appeal", from Ultra Brite toothpaste advertising
"The revolution will not get rid of the nubs", the nubs being beard stubble, from a Gillette Techmatic razor advertisement of the period
Willie Mays, baseball player
"NBC will not be able to predict the winner at 8:32", a reference to television networks predicting the winner of presidential elections shortly after the polls close at 8 p.m.
Whitney Young, civil rights leader
Roy Wilkins, executive director of the NAACP
Watts, a neighborhood in Los Angeles, alluding to the Watts Riots of 1965
"Red, black, and green", the colors of the Pan-African flag
Green Acres, a U.S. television sitcom
The Beverly Hillbillies, a U.S. television sitcom
"Hooterville Junction" (a corruption of Petticoat Junction, a U.S. television sitcom, and its fictitious location)
"...will no longer be so damned relevant," a statement of approval toward the rural purge that led to the above three shows being canceled
Dick and Jane, generic white couple derived from white children, a brother and sister, featured in American basal readers
Search for Tomorrow, a popular U.S. television soap opera
The Brighter Day, another U.S. television soap opera
"Hairy-armed women liberationists", participants in second-wave feminism
Jackie Onassis, the late U.S. President John F. Kennedy's widow, seen during the period in television broadcasts of Kennedy memorials
Jim Webb, U.S. composer
Francis Scott Key, lyricist of "The Star-Spangled Banner"
Glen Campbell, U.S. pop/country music singer, then hosting The Glen Campbell Goodtime Hour
Tom Jones, Welsh pop music singer, then hosting This Is Tom Jones
Johnny Cash, U.S. country music singer, then hosting The Johnny Cash Show
Engelbert Humperdinck, British pop music singer, then hosting The Engelbert Humperdinck Show
Rare Earth, all-white U.S. rock band signed to Motown Records (this band is only referred to in the 1971 version)
"White tornado", advertising slogan for Ajax cleanser, "Ajax cleans like a white tornado"
"White lightning", a term for moonshine, the name of a 1950s country and western song by George Jones, and an American psychedelic rock band.
"Dove in your bedroom", an advertising image associated with Dove anti-perspirant deodorant
"Put a tiger in your tank", an Esso (now Exxon) advertising slogan created by Chicago copywriter Emery Smith
"Giant in your toilet bowl," a reference to Liquid-Plumr commercials saying that it cleared so well it was like "having a giant in your toilet bowl" with an animation of a large arm using a plunger on your toilet.
"Things go better with Coke", a Coca-Cola advertising slogan
"Fights germs that may cause bad breath", from Listerine advertising
"Will put you in the driver's seat", reference to advertising slogan for Hertz car rental.


== References to the Song ==
During the Super Bowl LIX Halftime Show in New Orleans (at which 47th president Donald Trump was in attendance), rapper Kendrick Lamar made a reference to the "The Revolution Will Not Be Televised" during his performance, in which he said, "The revolution about to be televised / You picked the right time but the wrong guy," and then led into his song "Squabble Up". He later made a second possible reference, when he ended his Halftime Show with his song "TV Off", meaning that the revolution will not be televised. Judging by other references to black history and progressive or revolutionary music, this may have been a deliberate decision to protest the sitting president.


== See also ==
Black Arts Movement


== References ==


== External links ==
Scott-Heron, Gil (2007). Eleveld, Mark (ed.). The Revolution Will Not Be Televised. The Spoken Word Revolution Redux. Naperville, Ill.: Sourcebooks MediaFusion. pp. 214–215.
Gil Scott-Heron - The Revolution Will Not Be Televised on YouTube