Elimination Chamber: Toronto (known as No Escape in Germany) is an upcoming 2025 professional wrestling event produced by the American company WWE. It will be the 15th Elimination Chamber event and will take place on Saturday, March 1, 2025, at Rogers Centre in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The event will air via pay-per-view (PPV) and livestreaming and will be held for wrestlers from the promotion's Raw and SmackDown brand divisions. The event is based around the Elimination Chamber match, a type of multi-person elimination-based Steel Cage match in which championships or future opportunities at championships are at stake.
This will be the first Elimination Chamber event in Toronto and the first WWE event to be held at Rogers Centre since WrestleMania X8 in 2002 when it was still known as the SkyDome. It will also be the second Elimination Chamber event in Canada after the 2023 edition and the fourth consecutive Elimination Chamber to be held outside of the United States. This will also be the final Elimination Chamber appearance of John Cena due to his retirement from professional wrestling at the end of 2025.


== Production ==


=== Background ===
Elimination Chamber is a professional wrestling event first produced by the American promotion WWE in 2010. It has been held every year since, except in 2016, generally in February. The concept of the event is that one or two main event matches are contested inside the Elimination Chamber, which is a type of multi-person elimination-based Steel Cage match in which championships or future opportunities at championships are at stake.
Announced on November 8, 2024, the 15th Elimination Chamber event, titled as Elimination Chamber: Toronto, is scheduled to take place on Saturday, March 1, 2025, at Rogers Centre in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and will feature wrestlers from the Raw and SmackDown brand divisions. This will mark the second Elimination Chamber event to be held in Canada, after 2023, and the fourth consecutive to be held outside of the United States, after the 2022, 2023, and 2024 events, which were held in Saudi Arabia, Canada (Montreal), and Australia, respectively. This will also mark WWE's first event to be held at the Rogers Centre since WrestleMania X8 in 2002 when the stadium was still known as the SkyDome. This will also be the second Elimination Chamber event to have a subtitle named after its host city and to take place in an outdoor venue, both after 2024.
The event will air on pay-per-view worldwide and will be available to livestream on Peacock in the United States, Netflix in most international markets, and the WWE Network in any remaining countries that have not yet transferred to Netflix due to pre-existing contracts. This marks the first Elimination Chamber to livestream on Netflix following the WWE Network's merger under the service in January 2025 in those areas. Rogers Communications, the owner of Rogers Centre, has been a longstanding partner of WWE and its parent company TKO, having been its broadcast and WWE Network distribution partner in Canada from 2014 to 2024, and continuing as the Canadian broadcast partner of co-owned mixed martial arts promotion Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC), WWE's sister company under TKO.
In 2011 and since 2013, the event has been promoted as "No Escape" in Germany as it was feared that the name "Elimination Chamber" may remind people of the gas chambers used during the Holocaust.


=== Storylines ===
The event will comprise matches that result from scripted storylines. Results are predetermined by WWE's writers on the Raw and SmackDown brands, while storylines are produced on WWE's weekly television shows, Monday Night Raw and Friday Night SmackDown.
On July 6, 2024, at Money in the Bank, John Cena officially announced that he would retire from professional wrestling at the end of 2025, having wrestled for WWE since 2002 (though part-time since 2018). Cena also stated that he would compete at Elimination Chamber, which would be his last Elimination Chamber event. After losing the Royal Rumble match at the 2025 Royal Rumble, during the event's post-show, Cena declared that he would compete in the men's Elimination Chamber match as it would be his last time at an opportunity to compete for a world championship in the main event of a WrestleMania. The next day, Raw General Manager Adam Pearce announced that qualifying matches would begin the following night on Raw. CM Punk won the first qualifier by defeating Sami Zayn. The third spot was determined on the February 7 episode of SmackDown, where Drew McIntyre defeated Jimmy Uso and LA Knight in a triple threat match. The fourth spot was determined on the February 10 episode of Raw, where Logan Paul defeated Rey Mysterio. The fifth spot will be determined on the February 14 episode of SmackDown by another triple threat match between Braun Strowman, Damian Priest, and Jacob Fatu, while the final spot will be decided by a match between Seth "Freakin" Rollins and Finn Bálor on the February 17 episode of Raw. As a result of Royal Rumble winner Jey Uso choosing to challenge Gunther for Raw's World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania 41, the winner of the men's Elimination Chamber match will challenge Cody Rhodes for SmackDown's Undisputed WWE Championship at WrestleMania.
Qualifiers for the women's Elimination Chamber match also began on the February 3 episode of Raw. Liv Morgan won the first qualifier by defeating Iyo Sky by disqualification due to interference from Women's World Champion Rhea Ripley. The second and third spots were determined on the February 7 episode of SmackDown, where Bianca Belair and Alexa Bliss defeated Piper Niven and Candice LeRae, respectively. The fourth spot was determined on the February 10 episode of Raw, where Bayley defeated Lyra Valkyria. The fifth spot will be determined on the February 14 episode of SmackDown, where Chelsea Green will face Naomi, while the final spot will be determined on the February 17 episode of Raw in a match between Raquel Rodriguez and NXT's Roxanne Perez. The winner of the women's Elimination Chamber match will earn a world championship match at WrestleMania 41 for the title that Royal Rumble winner Charlotte Flair does not choose.


== Matches ==


== Notes ==


== See also ==

WWE in Canada
Professional wrestling in Canada


== References ==


== External links ==
Elimination Chamber Official Website