The 2025 Prayag Maha Kumbh Mela, also referred to as the 2025 Prayag Kumbh Mela, is the ongoing iteration of the Kumbh Mela, a Hindu pilgrimage festival celebrating a full orbital revolution of Jupiter around the Sun. It is scheduled from 13 January to 26 February 2025, at the Triveni Sangam in Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India. It is the world's largest gathering,  with an estimated 400 to 450 million visitors. This event marks the completion of a 12-Kumbh Mela cycle and is officially termed a Maha Kumbh Mela, spanning 45 days.
The Kumbh Mela has been organized since many years with its commencement date unknown. As per astronomical calculations, the 2025 edition is unique since the constellation alignment seen is witnessed once in 144 years. The site of each Kumbh Mela is decided by the astrological alignment of Jupiter, the Sun and the Moon (Surya), and Moon. The Kumbh Mela has been recognised as part of Intangible Cultural Heritage by UNESCO.


== Significance ==
The Maha Kumbh Mela symbolises the victory of Gods over demons. In 2025, the event started on 13 January and is expected to conclude on 26 February.
The Maha Kumbh Mela is the world's largest peaceful congregation of people. This gathering contains millions of devotees immersing themselves in the Ganges, Yamuna, and the Saraswati, waters of which are considered holy by the Hindus, symbolising a purification of the soul and a path to attaining Moksha or liberation.


== Amrit Snan ==

Amrit Snan (transl. Nectar Baths) or Shahi  Snan are being held as follows:


== Financials ==
The budget for the event was about ₹63.82 billion (US$740 million) and it is estimated that the event will generate a revenue of more than ₹2 trillion (US$23 billion).


== Infrastructure ==

The Government of Uttar Pradesh have set up a temporary city covering 4,000 hectares (40 km2) to accommodate the pilgrims attending the event. To expand the available land, four dredging machines were used to reclaim 26 additional hectares (0.26 km2), significantly increasing the capacity to three times more than in 2019 Prayag Ardh Kumbh Mela. Prayagraj is also embracing smart city technologies to enhance urban living. The total length of the ghats is 12 km (7.5 mi), and the surrounding area has been divided into 25 sectors. About 150,000 tents were established to provide accommodation. Nearly 83 projects were completed at a cost of ₹14.28 billion (US$160 million) for the event.


=== Transport ===
Parking facilities cover an area of 1,850 hectares (18.5 km2). The total road length within the area was increased over 450 km (280 mi) to improve accessibility.
Indian Railways has announced an increase in the number of coaches in key trains, such as the Prayagraj Express and Lucknow Mail, to accommodate the expected influx of pilgrims during the Mahakumbh 2025. Indian Railways operated special trains to various railway stations in the area. About 360 trains including 190 special trains, 110 regular trains and 60 MEMU trains to cater to the pilgrims on the day of Mauni Amavasya on 29 January 2025.


=== Health and sanitation ===
The Prayagraj Mela Committee set up 150,000 toilets and urinals in the Maha Kumbh area, and a monitoring system was launched to track sanitation levels in toilets. About 10,000 sanitation workers were engaged for cleaning activity. One cleaner was allocated for every ten toilets with a supervisor monitoring a batch of ten such personnel. The Uttar Pradesh State Government deputed 500 dedicated Ganga Praharis for cleaning the river during Maha Kumbh. Health camps and medical support : Mobile health units and emergency medical services are deployed to handle any health emergencies.


=== Safety and security ===
About 40,000 police officers from the Uttar Pradesh Police and surveillance systems were deployed for the event. Additionally, forces from the Uttar Pradesh Provincial Armed Constabulary (UP-PAC), National Disaster Response Force, and Central Armed Police Forces assisted in maintaining security. A network of around 2,300 cameras provided round-the-clock monitoring, enhancing surveillance across the Mela area. Underwater drones capable of diving up to 100 m (330 ft) were used in recovery operations. Maharashtra Police sent two teams to study the security arrangements and traffic management in the area during the Mahakumbh Mela, so they can use the same strategy with the Kumbh Mela in Nashik in 2027.
The state government allocated ₹1.31 billion (US$15 million) for the fire department. The Uttar Pradesh Fire and Emergency Services Department deployed 351 firefighting vehicles and 2000+ personnel across 50+ fire stations and 20 fire posts. It also deployed four articulating water towers to enhance fire fighting capabilities. These towers can extend 30 m (98 ft) horizontally, and 35 m (115 ft) vertically, and are designed to handle large fire events. Video recorders and thermal imaging cameras were deployed for real-time monitoring and precise firefighting.
The organising committee set up ten lost and found centres across various sectors to reunite missing individuals with their families. These centres use digital registration to keep track of people, with details on missing individuals displayed at all centres. Regular audio announcements, and messages across social media platforms were used to spread information on lost individuals. A mobile application was launched  which provided information to the pilgrims. Artificial intelligence tools and chatbots were used to assist tourists and pilgrims.


== Stampede ==

On 29 January 2025, a stampede at the festival grounds left at least 30 people dead and 60 others injured. A second crush in the following hours killed seven people including a three-year-old child. The official death toll count has been disputed, with reports suggesting the actual number of fatalities being higher than the government's figure. A report by the Indian media watchdog Newslaundry based on hospital and police records claims the death toll to be at least 79. These discrepancies have led to criticism of the government's handling of the incident and calls for greater transparency.


== Attendance ==
The 2025 Maha Kumbh Mela has made preparations for the attendance of up to 40 crores (400 million) visitors. Many tourists and pilgrims come from various countries such as Australia, Bhutan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Nepal, Netherlands, Pakistan, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,Taiwan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine,  United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom and United States.
A delegation of 118 diplomats, including the Heads of Mission, their spouses, and diplomats from 77 countries, visited the Mahakumbh at Prayagraj on 1 February 2025.


=== Arrival of President Droupadi Murmu in Prayagraj ===
President Droupadi Murmu on Monday visited the Maha Kumbh Mela in Prayagraj and took a holy dip at the Triveni Sangam. After taking the dip, she offered prayers at Triveni Sangam--which is a confluence of the Ganges, Yamuna and Saraswati.


=== Arrival of Prime Minister Narendra Modi ===
On 5 February 2025, Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrived at Prayagraj to participate in the ongoing Kumbh Mela. As part of the sacred rituals, he took a holy dip in the Triveni Sangam. His visit was marked by grand ceremonial events and prayers, and a boat ride to the Sangam with Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath. The visit was widely covered by media outlets. Since Modi arrived after the 29 January stampede that killed dozens, opposition parties have blamed the tragedy on mismanagement and accused his Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of hiding the real death toll.


=== Notable people ===


==== Spiritual leaders ====
Various Akharas such as Digambar Akhara, Juna Akhara, Agni Akhara, Avahan Akhara, Kinnar Akhara, Mahanirvani Akhara, Atal Akhara, Niranjani Akhara, Nirmohi Akhara, and Udasi Akhara were part of the Kumbh Mela. Spiritual leaders who were part of the festivities include:

Dhirendra Krishna Shastri, Peethadhish of the Bageshwar Dham Sarkar
Swami Avdheshanand Giri, Acharya Mahamandaleshwar of Juna Akhara
Swami Nischalananda Saraswati, 145th Shankaracharya of the Purvamnaya Sri Govardhana Peetham, Puri
Swami Ramabhadracharya, founder of Tulsi Peeth and an incumbent Jagdguru Ramanandacharya
Swami Ramdev, yoga guru
Gurudev Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, founder of the Art of Living Foundation.


==== Government and politics ====
Droupadi Murmu, 15th President of India.
Jagdeep Dhankhar, 14th Vice President of India
Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India
Yogi Adityanath, Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh with his cabinet
Mohan Yadav, Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh
Bhupendrabhai Patel, Chief Minister of Gujarat.
Pushkar Singh Dhami, Chief Minister of Uttarakhand
D. K. Shivkumar, Deputy Chief Minister of Karnataka
Dattatreya Hosabale, General Secretary of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
Anurag Thakur, Member of Parliament in the Lok Sabha member
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, King of Bhutan
Harivansh Narayan Singh, Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha
Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs
Rajnath Singh, Minister of Defence
Kiren Rijiju, Minister for Minority Affairs
Bhajan Lal Sharma, Chief Minister of Rajasthan
Akhilesh Yadav, former Chief minister of Uttar Pradesh
Brajesh Pathak, Deputy Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh
Arun Govil, Member of Parliament from Meerut
Hema Malini, Member of Parliament from Mathura
Ram Nath Kovind, former President of India
Ravi Kishan, Member of Parliament from Gorakhpur
Dilip Ghosh, Former Member of Parliament from Medinipur and former national vice President of BJP


==== Film and media ====
Adah Sharma,  Hindi and Telugu actress
Anupam Kher, Bollywood actor and producer
Avinash Tiwary, Indian actor
Bhagyashree, Indian Bollywood actress
Chris Martin, British singer and co-founder of the rock band Coldplay
Dakota Johnson, American actress and daughter of Don Johnson and Melanie Griffith
Esha Gupta, Indian actress and model
Guru Randhawa, singer, songwriter and music composer
Himansh Kohli, Indian Bollywood actor
Kabir Khan, director, screenwriter and cinematographer of Bollywood
Kubbra Sait, Indian actress
Mamta Kulkarni, former Bollywood actress
Milind Soman, Indian Bollywood actor
Neena Gupta, Indian Bollywood actress
Nuseir Yassin, Israeli-Palestenian vlogger
Pankaj Tripathi, Indian Bollywood actor.
Poonam Pandey, Indian model and actress
Raj Arjun, Indian Actor
Remo D'Souza, choreographer, film director, and producer
Rajkummar Rao, Indian Bollywood actor
Roshni Walia, Indian actress
Sanjay Mishra, Indian Bollywood actor
Sonal Chauhan, Indian actress
Sourabh Raaj Jain, Indian Bollywood actor
Shankar Mahadevan, singer and composer
Shivangi Joshi, lead actress at Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai
Shreema Bhattacharjee, Bengali actress
Siddharth Nigam, Indian actor from Prayagraj
Srinidhi Shetty, Indian kannada actress
Sunil Grover, actor and comedian, part of The Kapil Sharma Show
Tina Ambani, former actress and wife of Anil Ambani
Vijay Deverakonda, Telugu actor
Vinod Bhanushali, Indian film producer


==== Business ====
Balkrishna, chairman of Patanjali Ayurved
Anil Ambani, chairman and managing director of Reliance Group
Gautam Adani, founder and chairman of the Adani Group
Laurene Powell Jobs, chairperson of Steve Jobs trust
Mukesh Ambani, chairman and managing director of Reliance Industries.
Nita Ambani, chairman, founder and managing director of Reliance Foundation  
Pieter Elbers, CEO of IndiGo
Sudha Murty, founder and chairperson of Infosys Foundation


==== Sports ====
The Great Khali, retired professional wrestler
Mary Kom, former Olympic boxer
Suresh Raina, former Indian cricketer
Jay Shah, Chairman of the International Cricket Council
R. P. Singh, former Indian cricketer
Navdeep Singh, Indian para-athletics
Saina Nehwal, Indian badminton player


== See also ==
Prayag Kumbh Mela


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website