Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy is an upcoming romantic comedy film directed by Michael Morris from a screenplay by Helen Fielding, Dan Mazer and Abi Morgan. The sequel to Bridget Jones's Baby (2016) and the fourth installment in the Bridget Jones film series, it is based on the 2013 novel by Fielding. Renée Zellweger, Hugh Grant, Colin Firth and Emma Thompson reprise their roles as Bridget Jones, Daniel Cleaver, Mark Darcy and Doctor Rawlings, respectively, from previous installments, with Chiwetel Ejiofor, Leo Woodall, Isla Fisher, Josette Simon, Nico Parker and Leila Farzad joining the cast.
Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy is scheduled to be released in the United States on the streaming service Peacock on 13 February 2025, and internationally in theaters by Universal Pictures on 14 February 2025.


== Cast ==
Renée Zellweger as Bridget Jones
Hugh Grant as Daniel Cleaver
Emma Thompson as Doctor Rawlings
Chiwetel Ejiofor as Mr. Wallaker, a teacher at Bridget's children's school
Leo Woodall as Roxster, Bridget's sardonic and brazen new love interest
Colin Firth as Mark Darcy
Jim Broadbent as Colin Jones, Bridget's father
Gemma Jones as Pamela Jones, Bridget's mother
Isla Fisher as Rebecca, Bridget's new neighbour
Josette Simon
Nico Parker as Chloe, Bridget's children's babysitter
Leila Farzad as Nicolette
Sarah Solemani as Miranda, Bridget's friend and Hard News's anchorwoman
Sally Phillips as Sharon "Shazzer"
Shirley Henderson as Jude
James Callis as Tom
Celia Imrie as Una Alconbury
Ian Midlane as Paul


== Production ==
In October 2022, Helen Fielding responded to reports about a fourth film in the Bridget Jones film series, telling the Radio Times that a sequel to Bridget Jones's Baby was in the works.
In April 2024, a fourth film in the Bridget Jones film series based on the third book in the Bridget Jones series, Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy, was confirmed. Renée Zellweger, Hugh Grant and Emma Thompson were confirmed to be reprising their roles from previous installments, with Chiwetel Ejiofor and Leo Woodall joining the cast. Michael Morris will direct the film from a script by Fielding with further contributions from Abi Morgan and Dan Mazer, with Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner and Jo Wallett producing under the Working Title Films banner. Miramax will also co-finance the film. In May, Isla Fisher, Josette Simon, Nico Parker, and Leila Farzad joined the cast of the film, with Jim Broadbent, Gemma Jones, Sarah Solemani, Sally Phillips, Shirley Henderson, and James Callis reprising their roles from the previous films.
While Bridget's former love interest Mark Darcy (Colin Firth) appears in the film's trailer, it is revealed that he has died, leaving Bridget a widow, and fans were reported to be horrified.
Principal photography began on May 10, 2024, at the Sky Studios Elstree in London. Filming wrapped on August 8.


== Release ==
The film is scheduled to be released on 13 February 2025 on Peacock and in cinemas internationally on 14 February 2025 by Universal Pictures.


== References ==


== External links ==
Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy at IMDb