The Musk family includes Maye Musk, a model and author; Errol Musk, a mine-owner, businessman and politician; their children Elon Musk, Kimbal Musk, and Tosca Musk, as well as nephew Lyndon Rive. Elon Musk's ex-wives are Justine Musk and Talulah Riley, and he has many children. Maye's father Joshua N. Haldeman was a notable chiropractor, aviator, and politician who was a proponent of technocracy and apartheid. Geographically, the family has roots in England, Canada, South Africa, and the United States of America.


== Early history ==
Errol Musk's mother, Cora Amelia Robinson, was English from Liverpool, and his father, Walter Henry James Musk, was South African. 
Maye Musk's parents were Winnifred Josephine "Wyn" (Fletcher) and Joshua Norman Haldeman. Haldeman was a Canadian chiropractor and political activist who, in the early days of formalized apartheid, moved to South Africa. Prior to the move, Haldeman headed the Canadian branch of Technocracy movement and ran for the Parliament of Canada on the Social Credit Party ticket. Over the course of his life, he publicly expressed racist, anti-Semitic, and anti-democratic views, promoted a number of conspiracy theories, and was a supporter of South Africa's apartheid system.
The Haldeman couple spent time searching for the Lost City of the Kalahari by plane. Haldeman's mother Almeda Jane (Norman) Haldeman was the first recorded chiropractor in Canada.


== Errol Musk ==

Errol Graham Musk is a South African politician and businessman. His mother, Cora Amelia Musk (née Robinson), was British and his father Walter Henry James Musk was a South African army sergeant, who served as a cryptographer in a military intelligence unit in Egypt during World War II. Errol attended Clapham High School, where he dated Maye Haldeman, and the pair married in 1970.: 44  The family lived in Pretoria, where Maye worked as a dietitian and a model. Their first child, Elon Reeve Musk, was born in 1971, named after Maye's grandfather J. Elon Haldeman, with the name Reeve after her maternal grandmother's maiden name.
On March 9, 1972, Musk was elected as an independent to represent Sunnyside on the Pretoria City Council.: 52  In 1980,: 71  he became a member of the Progressive Federal Party, the new official opposition formed in 1977, and ran as their Sunnyside nominee in the 1981 election.: 52 : 225, fn 119  In 1983, his resignation from the PFP over its stance towards the constitutional referendum was front page news for the ruling National Party's organ Die Burger, which portrayed the opposition as divided.: 225, fn 119  Musk rebelled against the PFP's call for rejecting the new constitution and cited his agreement with the New Republic Party's position that the Tricameral Parliament was a step in the right direction.: 71–72 
Musk studied electromechanics at the University of Pretoria, worked as an electrical and mechanical engineering consultant, and developed properties, especially retail and office property development.: 27  His lucrative engineering business took on "large projects such as office buildings, retail complexes, residential subdivisions, and an air force base." He also owned an auto parts store, at least half a share in an emerald mine, and even "one of the biggest houses in Pretoria" In 1979, Musk and wife Maye divorced. Maye's book recalls that at the time of the divorce, he owned two homes, a yacht, a plane, five luxury cars, and a truck.
In her memoir, Maye characterized her marriage as abusive and alleged Errol had been violent. She recounts a time during their divorce when she sought refuge at a neighbor's home after Errol showed up with a knife looking for her. After the divorce, Musk repeatedly sued his ex-wife for custody of their children.
He was briefly married to a woman named Sue. 
In the early 1990s, Errol, then aged 45, married Heide Bezuidenhout, a 25-year old he described as "one of the best looking women I've ever seen in my life". They had two children. Jana Bezuidenhout, who later became his romantic partner, was his stepdaughter from that marriage, four years old at the time Errol became her stepfather.   
In the early 1980s, Errol built a lodge in the Timbavati Game Reserve to rent to tourists.: ch. 3 
In 1986, he acquired rights to the output of three Zambian emerald mines, though he did not own mines themselves. In interviews with Walter Isaacson, he explained: "If you registered it, you would wind up with nothing, because the Blacks would take everything from you".: ch. 1  He later referred to his wealth during Elon's teen years in an interview with Business Insider South Africa, saying he had "so much money we couldn't even close our safe" and mentioned his emerald dealings. Snopes confirmed that at some point he owned "a stake in an emerald mine near Lake Tanganyika in Zambia". He once described his emerald mine as an "under the table" operation.
According to the 2015 biography of Elon Musk titled Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future, in 1995, Errol Musk gave $28,000 to Elon and Kimbal as they were starting up the software company Zip2. Elon Musk has denied receiving the money from his father.
Errol has expressed natalist views, once commenting, "The only thing we are on Earth for is to reproduce."
In 2014, Musk gave an interview about his son Elon. In 2017, Musk was interviewed by Neil Strauss of Rolling Stone for a profile of Elon titled "The Architect of Tomorrow". Errol recalled that he had once shot and killed in self-defense "three out of five or six armed people" who had broken into his home. Elon described his father Errol as a "terrible human being", adding: "Almost every evil thing you could possibly think of, he has done."
In March 2018, it was reported that Errol had fathered a child with his adult step-daughter Jana Bezuidenhout.
In July 2022, Errol gave an interview to the tabloid newspaper The Sun, announcing that he and Jana Bezuidenhout had had another child. Musk has a total of seven children, according to People magazine in November 2022. On August 1, 2022, Errol appeared on The Kyle and Jackie O Australian radio show, saying he was "not proud" of Elon.
Errol was interviewed by author Walter Isaacson for his 2023 biography of Musk's son Elon, which discussed Errol Musk at length. In June 2024, he said Elon had upgraded his home security system, fearing he was at risk of kidnapping.
In 2024, Errol defended Elon after the latter said that the United Kingdom was heading towards a civil war. Later in 2024 Errol said that Prime Minister Keir Starmer was a fascist as a result of his response to the 2024 United Kingdom riots. He later called for Starmer's resignation. In January 2025, he again defended his son's remarks but also urged people to ignore them.
In a January 2025 video interview, Errol Musk stated that governance in South Africa has deteriorated. Later in January, Errol endorsed a meme coin called "Musk It" and revealed that he planned to raise $200 million for the Musk Institute via this project.
In February 2025, Errol arranged a phone call between his son Elon and South African President Cyril Ramaphosa on which the two discussed the impact of Donald Trump's policies on South Africa.


== Maye Musk ==

Maye Musk (née Haldeman; born April 19, 1948) is a model, dietitian and author. She has been a model for 50 years, appearing on the covers of magazines, including a Time magazine health edition, Women's Day, international editions of Vogue, and Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue. She is the mother of Elon Musk, Kimbal Musk and Tosca Musk. She holds Canadian, South African, and American citizenship. She is a registered dietitian. She published her memoir, A Woman Makes a Plan in 2019.


== Kimbal Musk ==

Kimbal James Musk (born September 20, 1972) is a South African restaurateur, chef, and entrepreneur. He owns The Kitchen Restaurant Group, a collection of restaurants located in Colorado and Chicago. He is the co-founder and chairman of Big Green, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit that has built hundreds of outdoor classrooms called Learning Gardens in schoolyards across America. Musk is also the co-founder and chairman of Square Roots, an urban farming company growing food in hydroponic, indoor, climate controlled shipping containers. Musk currently sits on the boards of Tesla Inc. and SpaceX, both of which his brother Elon is the current CEO. He was on the board of Chipotle Mexican Grill from 2013 to 2019. He is the brother of Tosca Musk, son of Errol and Maye Musk, and a major shareholder in Tesla.
In 1995 he co-founded, with his brother, Elon Musk, the software company Zip2, which was acquired by Compaq for $307 million in 1999.


== Tosca Musk ==

Tosca Musk (born July 20, 1974) is a South African filmmaker. She is an executive producer and director of feature films, television programs, and web content. Her work includes K. Bromberg's Driven, Rachel van Dyken's Matchmaker's Playbook, and her web series, Tiki Bar TV. Tosca is the younger sister of Elon Musk and Kimbal Musk, and daughter of Errol Musk and Maye Musk. She co-founded the streaming service Passionflix.


== Elon Musk ==


=== Relationships and children of Elon Musk ===
Musk has fathered twelve children; one of whom is deceased. He met his first wife, Canadian author Justine Wilson, while attending Queen's University in Ontario, Canada; they married in 2000. In 2002, their first child, a male, died of sudden infant death syndrome at the age of 10 weeks. After the baby's death, the couple used in vitro fertilization (IVF) to continue their family; they had twins in 2004, followed by triplets in 2006. All were male. The couple divorced in 2008 and have shared custody of their children.
The elder twin later came out as a trans woman and, in 2022, officially changed her name to Vivian Jenna Wilson, adopting her mother's surname because she no longer wished to be associated with Musk. Musk blamed the estrangement on what the Financial Times characterized as "the supposed takeover of elite schools and universities by neo-Marxists", and has said that Vivian's gender transition is primarily what sparked his drive to "destroy the woke mind virus". In a July 2024 episode of Jordan Peterson's podcast, Musk said that he had "lost [his] son, essentially" because of gender-affirming care. He commented: "You know, they call it deadnaming for a reason. The reason it's called deadnaming is because your son is dead", again referring to the "woke mind virus," stating that Vivian "is dead, killed by the woke mind virus". Vivian responded publicly, criticizing Musk for his comments on the transition; saying that Musk was "cold", "quick to anger", "uncaring and narcissistic", and that his infrequent visits commonly involved him berating her for being feminine. On November 7, 2024, in response to a news article about his daughter's reaction to Trump's election, Musk repeated "the woke mind virus killed my son."
In 2008, Musk began dating English actress Talulah Riley. They married two years later at Dornoch Cathedral in Scotland. In 2012, the couple divorced, before remarrying the following year. After briefly filing for divorce in 2014, Musk finalized a second divorce from Riley in 2016. Musk then dated Amber Heard for several months in 2017; he had reportedly been "pursuing" her since 2012.
In 2018, Musk and Canadian musician Grimes said that they were dating. Grimes gave birth to Musk's seventh child, a baby assigned male in May 2020. Musk and Grimes originally gave the baby the name "X Æ A-12", which would have violated California regulations as it contained characters (Arabic numerals) that are not in the modern English alphabet, which they then changed to "X Æ A-Xii". They have received criticism for choosing a name perceived to be impractical and difficult to pronounce.
In December 2021, Grimes and Musk had a second child together (Musk's eighth child), assigned female and born via surrogacy. Despite the pregnancy, Musk confirmed reports that the couple were "semi-separated" in September 2021; in an interview with Time in December 2021, he said he was single. In March 2022, Grimes said of her relationship with Musk: "I would probably refer to him as my boyfriend, but we're very fluid." Later that month, Grimes tweeted that she and Musk had broken up again. In September 2023 it was reported that the pair had had a third child (Musk's eleventh), assigned male. In October 2023, Grimes sued Musk over parental rights and custody of their eldest.
In July 2022, Insider published court documents revealing that Musk had had his ninth and tenth children, twins born via IVF with Shivon Zilis, director of operations and special projects at Neuralink, in November 2021. One was assigned male, the other female. They were born weeks before Musk and Grimes had their second child via surrogacy in December. The news "raise[d] questions about workplace ethics", given that Zilis directly reported to Musk. Zilis's third child together with Musk (his twelfth child) was born in early 2024 via surrogacy.
Also in July 2022, The Wall Street Journal reported that Musk allegedly had an affair with Nicole Shanahan, the wife of Google co-founder Sergey Brin, in 2021, leading to their divorce the following year. Musk denied the report. Musk also had a relationship with Australian actress Natasha Bassett, who has been described as "an occasional girlfriend". In October 2024, The New York Times reported Musk bought a Texas compound for his children and their mothers, though Musk denied having done so.


== Lyndon Rive ==
Lyndon Rive is a cousin of Elon Musk, their mothers are twin sisters.


== Further reading ==
Musk, Maye (December 31, 2019) A Woman Makes a Plan: Advice for a Lifetime of Adventure, Beauty, and Success Penguin Random House
Isaacson, Walter (September 12, 2023) Elon Musk Simon and Schuster


== References ==