Charlie Smyth (born 26 June 2001) is an Irish multi-sport athlete who plays as a placekicker for the New Orleans Saints of the National Football League (NFL). He has previously played  Gaelic football as a goalkeeper at senior level for the Down county team, before joining the NFL's International Player Pathway Program (IPPP) in 2024.


== Gaelic football career ==
Smyth began playing Gaelic football when he was four years old. He first came to prominence as the goalkeeper for Down's Ulster Under-20 Championship winning team in 2020, scoring in every game of the campaign that ended at the All-Ireland semi-final stage.
In 2021, Smyth was the goalkeeper on the Down winning team to lift the Ulster Under-20 title, their first since 2009. He was one of three players from Down who received honours in the EirGrid All-Ireland Under-20 football awards that year.
In 2023, he made his debut on the Down county football team and was a Tailteann Cup runner-up with Down.


== American football career ==
In January 2024, Smyth began training to play in the National Football League (NFL) via the National Football League's International Player Pathway Program. He participated in the NFL Scouting Combine where he connected on 12 of 16 field goal attempts. At his pro-day, he made 8 of 10 field goals, including one from 60 yards. On 29 March 2024, he signed a three-year contract with the New Orleans Saints, becoming the first GAA player to sign an NFL contract. Smyth had sent an email to the NFL in July 2019 asking for a tryout hoping to see if his Gaelic football skills could transfer to the NFL. He was waived on August 27, and re-signed to the practice squad. Smyth signed a reserve/future contract with the Saints on January 6, 2025.


== Personal life ==
Smyth is a native of Mayobridge, Newry. He attended St Colman's College. Smyth studied at St Mary's University College, where he was completing a master's degree in physical education. Prior to that, Smyth had trained as a primary school teacher with Irish language and was ready to teach while also playing GAA with his club Mayobridge.


== References ==


== External links ==

Career statistics from NFL.com · ESPN · Yahoo Sports · Pro Football Reference