Peter Brian Hegseth (; born June 6, 1980) is an American author, former television host, and Army veteran who is serving as the 29th United States secretary of defense since January 25, 2025, in the second administration of President Donald Trump.
After graduating from Princeton University, Hegseth began his career working as an analyst for Bear Stearns. From 2003 to 2014 and again from 2019 to 2021, he served as an infantry officer in the Army National Guard, attaining the rank of Major. He received the Bronze Star while on a combat deployment to Iraq in 2005. In 2014, he voluntarily deployed to Afghanistan to train the Afghan security forces. Following his military service, Hegseth became an active figure in conservative and Republican politics and was the executive director of Vets for Freedom and Concerned Veterans for America. From 2014 to 2025, he was a political commentator for Fox News and was a weekend co-host of Fox & Friends from 2017 to 2024. 
In 2016, Hegseth emerged as a supporter of Donald Trump's presidential candidacy, and he served as an occasional advisor to Trump throughout the latter's first term as president. Following Hegseth's encouragement, Trump pardoned three soldiers accused or convicted of war crimes in 2019. Hegseth was considered to lead the United States Department of Veterans Affairs in the first Trump administration, but David Shulkin was tapped instead. After Trump announced his intention to nominate Hegseth as defense secretary, numerous reports surfaced about alleged sexual misconduct, financial mismanagement, and public drunkenness which threatened his confirmation; during his nomination hearing, Hegseth denied these claims. Hegseth holds strongly conservative views, and has been described as a Christian nationalist. He has written books including American Crusade (2020) and The War on Warriors (2024).
Soon after the re-election of Donald Trump in 2024, Hegseth was nominated to serve as secretary of defense in Trump's second administration. He was confirmed by the Senate in a 51–50 vote on January 24, 2025, with Vice President JD Vance casting the tie-breaking vote. He is the second-youngest person to hold this position, after Donald Rumsfeld. He was sworn in on January 25.


== Early life, family and education ==
Hegseth was born on June 6, 1980, in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the son of Brian, a basketball coach, and Penny Hegseth. He was raised in nearby Forest Lake and is of Norwegian descent on both sides of the family. He attended Forest Lake Area High School, where he played football and basketball, graduating in 1999 as valedictorian of his class.
Hegseth went on to earn his Bachelor of Arts in politics at Princeton University in 2003.
In college, he wrote for The Princeton Tory magazine, the school's conservative student newspaper, eventually rising to become its publisher. As publisher, he published another student's commentary that sex with an unconscious woman was not rape since there was no duress.  As publisher, he wrote in 2002 that he "strove to defend the pillars of Western civilization against the distractions of diversity."
Hegseth played basketball for the Tigers under coach John Thompson III, but rarely played.
At Princeton, Hegseth joined the Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps in 2001. His senior thesis, Modern Presidential Rhetoric and the Cold War Context, was advised by Patrick Deneen.
In 2013, he earned a Master of Public Policy from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.


== Early career ==
After graduating from college in 2003, he briefly joined Bear Stearns as an equity capital markets analyst. 
In July 2005, Hegseth was again working as a capital markets analyst at Bear Stearns.


== Military service ==
After graduating from Princeton in 2003, Hegseth was commissioned as an infantry officer in the Minnesota National Guard.


=== Early deployments ===
During 2004–2005, his unit was called to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, under the operational control of the 3rd Battalion, 187th Infantry Regiment, of the 101st Airborne Division, where he served as an infantry platoon leader and was awarded the Army Commendation Medal.

His next deployment lasted from 2005 to 2006.  Shortly after returning from Cuba, Hegseth volunteered to serve in Baghdad and Samarra, Iraq, where he served first as an infantry platoon leader and later as civil-military operations officer. While serving in Iraq, Hegseth was traveling in a vehicle struck by a rocket-propelled grenade that did not explode. During his time in Iraq, he was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and a second  Army Commendation Medal.


=== Deployment to Afghanistan ===
Hegseth returned to active duty in 2012 as a captain. He volunteered to deploy to Afghanistan with the Minnesota Army National Guard to train Afghan security forces. In 2014, Hegseth was promoted to the rank of major and left active duty to be assigned to the Army Individual Ready Reserve (IRR).


=== DC National Guard service ===
Hegseth wrote in his fourth book that he rejoined the Guard from the IRR in 2019.  He served in the District of Columbia Army National Guard.
Hegseth was one of 12 national guardsmen flagged as a potential insider threat and removed from the group providing security for the 2021 presidential inauguration of Joe Biden.  In 2020, he volunteered to be one of the up-to-25,000 Guard troops authorized by the Pentagon to be put on active duty to help safeguard the January 20, 2021, inauguration. On January 14, 2021, a fellow Guard member who was the unit's security manager and on an anti-terrorism team sent an email to the unit's leaders notifying them of a tattoo on Hegseth's biceps reading "Deus Vult", a phrase the security manager determined was associated with the Crusades and, in the 21st century, with white supremacists who use it to invoke the idea of a white Christian medieval past. Shortly thereafter, Hegseth was told to stay home from the event. Hegseth has said that his National Guard superiors removed him because of his Jerusalem cross tattoo, a Christian symbol which they determined was connected to extremism.
He wrote in his fourth book that this caused him to resign in disgust. Hegseth wrote in the book that he separated from the IRR in January 2024.  His final day as a member of the D.C. Army National Guard was March 31, 2021.


== Advocacy and politics ==


=== Vets for Freedom ===
Upon his return from Iraq, Hegseth worked briefly at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research. According to his LinkedIn page, Hegseth left the conservative think tank in 2007 to work as executive director at Vets For Freedom (VFF). The organization advocated a greater troop presence in Iraq and Afghanistan. His job included responding to the Federal Election Commission as treasurer of the organization. By 2008, VFF was unable to pay its creditors, who became concerned that money was being wasted on organization parties. A 2009 forensic accountant report by creditors led to Hegseth admitting that the organization was about half a million dollars in debt. VFF's backers decided to merge its core functions with another veterans group, Military Families United, and reduce Hegseth's role. By 2011, Hegseth was demoted from executive director and president with a $45,000 salary to an officer with a $5,000 salary. In 2012, in Hegseth's final year at VFF, he was paid $8,000 while the organization received just $81 in grants.
Along with VFF, Hegseth also had been president of Concerned Veterans of America. According to the article "Pete Hegseth's Secret History" in The New Yorker magazine: "A trail of documents, corroborated by the accounts of former colleagues, indicates that Hegseth was forced to step down by both of the two nonprofit advocacy groups that he ran—Veterans for Freedom and Concerned Veterans for America—in the face of serious allegations of financial mismanagement, sexual impropriety, and personal misconduct." According to one report by a whistleblower, Hegseth was accused of having "treated the organization funds like they were a personal expense account".


=== MN PAC ===
In 2012, Hegseth formed the political action committee MN PAC. An APM Reports analysis found that while Hegseth ran the MN PAC political action committee, one-third of its $15,000 in funds were spent on Christmas parties for families and friends. Campaign finance laws in Minnesota do not prohibit such spending. Less than half of the PAC's resources were spent on candidates, and as of March 2018, the PAC had closed its account with the state board.


=== Senate campaign ===

In 2012, Hegseth ran for the Republican nomination for the U.S. Senate seat in Minnesota. He withdrew from the race after the May 2012 convention, but before the Republican primary election in August, both events in which Kurt Bills won the nomination.


=== Concerned Veterans for America ===
Hegseth was the executive director for Concerned Veterans for America, an advocacy group funded by the Koch brothers from 2013 to 2016. The group advocated greater privatization of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and sought to get veterans involved with conservative political causes. Concerned Veterans for America subsequently hired his brother Philip to work for the non-profit and paid him $108,000, according to tax records from 2016 and 2017. Asked about it, Hegseth's lawyer said that Philip, a May 2015 university graduate, was qualified for the media relations job, and noted that there was no prohibition against private entities hiring family members. In a whistleblower report, former CVA employees said Pete Hegseth was frequently heavily intoxicated during official events to the point of having to be restrained, passing out, and shouting slogans calling for the death of all Muslims. The report also said that he sexually pursued female employees and under his leadership the organization ignored allegations of sexual impropriety, including allegations of sexual assault. According to reporting by The New Yorker, mismanagement and alcoholism concerns led to Hegseth's forced resignation from CVA in January 2016.
Hegseth was considered to lead the Department of Veterans Affairs in the first Trump administration, but was rejected in favor of David Shulkin in 2017.


=== Campaign to pardon war criminals ===

In May 2019, it was reported that Trump was considering pardoning several US military service members who had been convicted of committing war crimes, including Eddie Gallagher, a veteran set to stand trial for allegedly shooting indiscriminately at civilians, hitting a girl and an elderly man, as well as fatally stabbing a captured teenage Islamic State (ISIS) member while he was receiving medical treatment. The Daily Beast and CNN later reported that Hegseth had sought to convince Trump to pardon these individuals for months. At the same time, Hegseth was discussing these cases on Fox News without disclosing that he had advised Trump to pardon them. In November 2019, Trump pardoned three service members accused or convicted of war crimes. Shortly before Trump announced his decision, Hegseth suggested that Trump was about to take "imminent action" in the cases.


== Fox News career ==

Hegseth joined Fox News as a contributor in 2014. In December 2018, Hegseth co-hosted Fox News Channel's All-American New Year with Fox Business Network's Kennedy, during which a pre-recorded telephone interview between him and Trump was broadcast. He has been a regular guest on Unfiltered with Dan Bongino since 2021.

On June 14, 2015, Hegseth accidentally hit a West Point drummer while axe throwing during a live segment in honor of Flag Day. Hegseth missed the target and the axe hit one of the people behind it. Footage of the accident soon became popular on the internet. In 2018 the drummer filed a lawsuit against Fox and Hegseth alleging that he had suffered "severe and serious personal injuries to his mind and body," and "permanent effects of pain, disability, disfigurement and loss of body function" as a result of their negligence.
During the 2016 Republican presidential primaries, Hegseth initially backed Marco Rubio, then Ted Cruz, and ultimately Donald Trump. Since then, Hegseth has emerged as a strong Trump supporter. As a Fox News personality, he frequently criticized the media and Democrats. He criticized special counsel Robert Mueller's investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election. Hegseth has appeared on Fox News Channel, as well as on CNN and MSNBC.
From 2017 to 2024, Hegseth was a co-host on the daily morning news and talk television program Fox and Friends.
In May 2018, Hegseth mocked The New York Times for ostensibly not covering a story about the capture of five ISIS leaders, referring to the paper as the "failing New York Times", even though the paper had already filed a report on the story.
In the 2023 court case of Dominion v. Fox News, Hegseth was, along with his co-hosts on Fox and Friends, presented in the case as having been responsible for "false and defamatory statements of fact about Dominion".
Hegseth resigned from Fox News upon his confirmation as secretary of defense.


== Secretary of Defense (2025–present) ==


=== Nomination and confirmation ===
On November 12, 2024, President-elect Donald Trump announced that he intended to nominate Hegseth to serve as the next U.S. secretary of defense. Hegseth ended his deal with Fox News that month so he could take the position. 
Several days later, a woman sent a memo to Trump's transition team about a 2017 sexual assault allegation against Hegseth. Several senators subsequently expressed concern. Republican senator Kevin Cramer said the allegations were a "pretty big problem, given that we have ... a sexual assault problem in our military" and "I'm not going to pre-judge him, but yeah, it's a pretty concerning accusation". Democratic senator Tammy Duckworth said, "It's frankly an insult and really troubling that Mr. Trump would nominate someone who has admitted that he's paid off a victim who has claimed rape allegations against him ... This is not the kind of person you want to lead the Department of Defense." After Fox colleagues told reporters that Hegseth had been drunk or hung over on the set more than a dozen times, several senators reported that he had promised them to stop drinking if appointed. Others called his inexperience a concern, as reported by Defense One, "Hegseth has never made national-security policy, served in a senior military role, worked in defense acquisition, or led an organization larger than a nonprofit advocacy group."
Republicans have overwhelmingly supported Hegseth's nomination, and Joni Ernst, who initially expressed skepticism, stated that she would be supporting him after "he was adequately able to answer all of my questions."
He appeared before the Senate Armed Services Committee on January 14, 2025. During the hearing, Hegseth denied allegations of sexual assault, marital infidelity, and public drunkenness by saying that these were "false claims" and said that "he had been redeemed by his 'Lord and Savior' for his failings in life." Regarding this statement, Senator Mark Kelly asked, "Which is it? Have you overcome personal issues, or are you the target of a smear campaign? It can’t be both."

On January 21, senators received an affidavit from his former sister-in-law, Danielle Hegseth, stating that she had observed "Hegseth's erratic and aggressive behavior", believed that "Hegseth has an alcohol abuse problem", believed that he "was abusive to his ex-wife Samantha", and swore that Samantha had "hid in her closet from Hegseth because she feared for her personal safety". Hegseth denied the affidavit's claims and his ex-wife said he was never physically abusive. In terms of the affidavit, the Senate Armed Services Committee Democrats made the following joint statement about it and the FBI background check:This affidavit is part of a disturbing pattern of behavior that has been documented through numerous public and private reports. The affidavit also raises additional questions about the thoroughness of his FBI background check during a rushed confirmation process.
On January 24, the Senate voted 50–50 for his nomination. Vice President JD Vance broke the tie, voting in favor of his nomination. Republican Senators Lisa Murkowski, Susan Collins, and Mitch McConnell joined the Senate Democrats to vote against the confirmation. Hegseth is only the second cabinet nominee in U.S. history, after Betsy DeVos, to be confirmed with a vice president's tiebreak. Politico reported that Hegseth's supporters aggressively went on the offensive against Democrats, journalists and Hegseth's accusers, while pushing Republican senators to confirm Hegseth, crucially convincing Senator Joni Ernst and finally turning Senator Thom Tillis. Politico further quoted a source close to Hegseth: "Reporters who went after Pete would have a very rough day or week or month ... We treated them as they should be treated – as adversaries in an adversarial process [...] we were so vicious with [Senator] Joni [Ernst] [...] because she was trying to get the [Defense Secretary] job for herself".


=== Tenure ===

On January 25, Vice President JD Vance swore Hegseth into office as the 29th secretary of defense. He is the first Minnesotan to hold the position. During his initial message to the military, Hegseth emphasized "restoring the warrior ethos, rebuilding our military, and re-establishing deterrence" while working with allies and partners to "deter aggression in the Indo-Pacific by Communist China, as well as supporting the president's priority to end wars responsibly and reorient to key threats."

 On January 28, 2025, Hegseth attended a meeting with Secretary of State Marco Rubio, held by National Security Advisor Michael Waltz, to "discuss implementing President Trump's vision of securing the nation and prioritizing American interests on both domestic and international fronts."
On January 29, 2025, Hegseth held a call with Australian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence Richard Marles to discuss US–Australian relations, AUKUS, and Australia's Guided Weapons and Explosive Ordnance program. Marles commented on the conversation to the press, saying: “It went really well, very warm, a sense of common purpose about the role of both Australia and America in the world, the role of Australia and America in the Indo Pacific." Later that same day, Hegseth spoke on the phone with Israeli Minister of Defense Israel Katz to "reaffirm the unbreakable bond between the United States and Israel."

Following the 2025 Potomac River mid-air collision, Hegseth responded on X with "Prayers for all involved" and ordered an immediate investigation into the cause of the accident. In a video posted by his department on X, Hegseth said the helicopter was performing "an annual proficiency training flight", that its crew was "fairly experienced", and that they were equipped with night vision goggles.


== Political positions ==

Hegseth has been described as a Christian nationalist. Alice Herman of The Guardian has described Hegseth as having a "Christian nationalist ideology", and as "someone immersed in a culture of rightwing Christianity, political extremism and violent ideation". Hegseth's views have been described as far-right by The Guardian.
In his book, American Crusade: Our Fight to Stay Free, Hegseth said he believes there are "irreconcilable differences between the Left and the Right in America leading to perpetual conflict that cannot be resolved through the political process". He furthermore called for an "American crusade", which he described as "a holy war for the righteous cause of human freedom". Hegseth characterizes "Americanism" in being opposition to forces like feminism, globalism, Marxism and progressivism and says either "Americanism" will prevail or "death" will. In a May 2024 interview where he talked about education, Hegseth said "Democracy, democracy, defend the democracy. Do you know what our founders did not want us to be? A democracy." Hegseth has explicitly rejected democracy in his book, equating it to a leftist demand; he has also expressed support for election-rigging through gerrymandering to "screw Democrats".
Hegseth predicted that if Democrats won the 2020 election, there would be a "national divorce", that the military and the police "will be forced to make a choice", and that "there will be some form of civil war". He also said that conservatives must "mock, humiliate, intimidate, and crush our leftist opponents" and to "attack first" to deal with a left he equates with "sedition". His book "lays out the strategy we must employ in order to defeat America's internal enemies". Hegseth has described progressives and Democrats as "enemies" of freedom, the U.S. Constitution, and America. Hegseth has said that victory for America includes the end of globalism, socialism, secularism, environmentalism, Islamism, genderism and leftism, the last of which he refers to as a "false religion" and "specter" that views non-believers as "infidels". He has announced his support for American nationalism. Hegseth believes Americans must build a border wall, raise tariffs, learn English and "fight back".


== Sexual assault allegation ==
In October 2017, a female staffer for the California Federation of Republican Women told police in Monterey, California, that Hegseth had sexually assaulted her in a hotel room after an organization event.
The woman told police that she was with Hegseth at the hotel bar, where "things got fuzzy" and, she said, a drug may have been slipped into her drink. She told police she remembered "being in an unknown room with Hegseth", who took away her phone and blocked her efforts to leave. She told police she "remembered saying 'no' a lot" and that Hegseth had sex with her. She told police that she did not recall the incident for several days, after which she went to the emergency room for a rape kit test, whereupon the police started an investigation. Hegseth told police that he did have sex with the woman but that it was consensual.
The police referred the matter to Monterey County district attorney Jeannine M. Pacioni, who declined to press charges, saying, "No charges were supported by proof beyond a reasonable doubt". A civil lawsuit was threatened, and in 2020, Hegseth paid the woman $50,000 as part of a non-disclosure agreement. In November 2024, Tim Parlatore, a lawyer for Hegseth, later said his client "felt that he was the victim of blackmail and innocent collateral damage" and paid only because he feared for his career.
The allegations, police report, and non-disclosure agreement came to public notice in November 2024, after Trump announced his intention to nominate Hegseth as U.S. defense secretary. The amount of the payment was revealed in January 2025.


== Personal life ==
In 2004, Hegseth married his first wife, Meredith Schwarz, who was his high school girlfriend from Minnesota; they divorced in 2009 after he admitted to five affairs. In 2010 he married his second wife, Samantha Deering; they have three sons.
In August 2017, while still married to Samantha, Hegseth's daughter Gwen was born to Fox executive producer Jennifer Rauchet. In September 2017, Samantha filed for divorce, which took 10 months to finalize. Hegseth and Rauchet, who has three young children from her first marriage, married on August 16, 2019.

In 2018, during Hegseth's divorce proceedings from his second wife, his mother Penelope Hegseth sent him an email criticizing his treatment of women. The email stated:You are an abuser of women – that is the ugly truth and I have no respect for any man that belittles, lies, cheats, sleeps around, and uses women for his own power and ego. You are that man (and have been for years) and as your mother it pains me and embarrasses me to say that, but it is the sad, sad truth ... It's time for a someone (I wish it was a strong man) to stand up to your abusive behavior and call it out, especially against women.The New York Times published this email in November 2024 after Trump announced his intention to nominate Hegseth to be defense secretary. Penelope Hegseth told the Times she had written it "in anger, with emotion" and had "immediately apologized in a separate email," adding that her previous characterization had "never been true."
Hegseth lives in Tennessee. He has said that he underwent a religious transformation in 2018 following his marriage to his third wife. Hegseth is a member of Pilgrim Hill Reformed Fellowship, a church in the Communion of Reformed Evangelical Churches.
Hegseth has several tattoos, among them a Jerusalem cross on his chest and one reading "Deus Vult", a Latin phrase meaning "God wills it", on his bicep.


== Books ==
Hegseth's books include:

Hegseth, Pete (2016). In the Arena. Threshold Editions. ISBN 978-1-4767-4934-1.
Hegseth, Pete (2020). American Crusade: Our Fight to Stay Free. Center Street. ISBN 978-1-5460-9874-4.
Hegseth, Pete (2022). Battle for the American Mind: Uprooting a Century of Miseducation. Broadside Books. ISBN 978-0-06-321504-7.
Hegseth, Pete (2024). The War on Warriors: Behind the Betrayal of the Men Who Keep Us Free. Broadside Books. ISBN 978-0-0633-8942-7.
Hegseth wrote the foreword to the 2017 book The Case Against the Establishment (ISBN 978-1-6826-1474-7) by Nick Adams and Dave Erickson.


== List of awards and decorations ==
Hegseth was decorated for his service in Iraq and Afghanistan. His military decorations and awards include:

Hegseth was also awarded the Expert Infantryman Badge; Army policy does not permit its wearing at the same time as the similar-in-appearance Combat Infantryman Badge, though a new Master Combat Badge with a gold wreath will represent the combination.


== See also ==
New Yorkers in journalism


== References ==


== External links ==

Hegseth at The Princeton Tory
Appearances on C-SPAN