Millie Bobby Brown Bongiovi (born 19 February 2004) is a British actress. She gained recognition for playing Eleven in the Netflix science fiction series Stranger Things (2016–present), for which she received nominations for two Primetime Emmy Awards. Brown has starred in the monster film Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) and its sequel Godzilla vs. Kong (2021). She also starred in and produced the Netflix films Enola Holmes (2020), Enola Holmes 2 (2022), and Damsel (2024).
In 2018, Brown was featured in the Time 100 list of the world's most influential people, and was appointed as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador, the youngest person ever selected for this position.


== Early life ==
Brown was born in Marbella, Málaga, Spain, on 19 February 2004, the third of four children born to British parents Kelly and Robert Brown. Brown was given the name "Bobby" by her father, an estate agent. She was born with partial hearing loss in her left ear and gradually lost all hearing in that ear over several years. She moved with her family back to England when she was four, settling in Bournemouth. When she was eight, the family moved to Orlando, Florida.


== Career ==


=== 2013–2017: Early roles and Stranger Things ===
In 2013, Brown made her acting debut as a guest star in the ABC fantasy drama series Once Upon a Time in Wonderland, a spin-off of Once Upon a Time, portraying the role of Young Alice. In 2014, she had a starring role in the BBC America paranormal drama-thriller series Intruders as Madison O'Donnell. She made guest appearances in the CBS police procedural drama NCIS, the ABC sitcom Modern Family and the ABC medical drama series Grey's Anatomy.
In 2016, Brown was cast to play Eleven in the Netflix science fiction horror series Stranger Things. She received critical praise for her performance and she was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series. She then won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series with her co-stars and won the 43rd Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor in a Television Series. For her role as Eleven in the second season of Stranger Things, she received her second nominations for a Screen Actors Guild Award and a Primetime Emmy Award in 2018.

In November 2016, Brown starred in the music video for Sigma and Birdy's single "Find Me". Since November 2016, she has appeared in commercial advertisements for investment and financial service company Citigroup. In January 2017, she made her modelling debut in Calvin Klein's "By Appointment" campaign. The following month, she was signed to the agency IMG Models. Brown appeared in the advertisement campaign of the Italian brand Moncler in the summer of 2018. Brown has also made appearances on the cover of Vogue.


=== 2018–present ===
Brown was chosen to voice in the Darren Aronofsky-produced virtual reality experience Spheres: Songs of Spacetime. In 2018, she was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time, becoming the youngest person to be included in the list. Additionally, she was named by Time magazine as one of the most influential teens of 2017 and of 2018. That year, she become the youngest person ever to be appointed a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. EA Games announced that Brown collaborated with The Sims 4 programmers to feature in the Sims 4 Positivity Challenge. In 2018, The Hollywood Reporter ranked Brown as amongst Hollywood's top thirty stars under age eighteen.
Brown made her feature film debut in 2019 in Godzilla: King of the Monsters, the sequel to the 2014 film Godzilla. She reprised her role in the next sequel, Godzilla vs. Kong (2021). She became the ambassador of UEFA's Together #WePlayStrong campaign. In 2019, Brown launched Florence by Mills, her own beauty product line. It is available at UK pharmacy Boots, Walmart in the United States and Shoppers Drug Mart in Canada. In 2020, Brown starred in and produced the film adaptation of The Enola Holmes Mysteries.
In 2022, Brown reprised her role as Enola Holmes in the sequel, Enola Holmes 2, and according to Variety earned $10 million for the role, emerging as one of the year's highest paid actresses in Hollywood. That year, she was also made an ambassador of the fashion brand Louis Vuitton. Brown released her debut novel, Nineteen Steps, based on her own family history, in September 2023. The novel is described as an "epic story of love, loss and secrets".
In 2024, Brown starred in and executive produced the fantasy film Damsel for Netflix, directed by Spanish filmmaker Juan Carlos Fresnadillo based on a screenplay by Dan Mazeau.
She will next star in the Russo brothers's The Electric State, an adaptation of Simon Stålenhag's graphic novel of the same name.


== Personal life ==
Brown came into the public eye at age 12 after being cast in Stranger Things. At age 14, memes using homophobic quotes which were falsely attributed to Brown began circulating on social media, which Brown stated was one of the reasons she eventually left Twitter. In addition to online bullying, she has also faced social media users and articles sexualising her. In response, Brown captioned a 2020 Instagram post on her 16th birthday with the comment,

There are moments I get frustrated from the inaccuracy, inappropriate comments, sexualisation and unnecessary insults that  have ultimately resulted in pain and insecurity for me.  
After Brown turned 18 in February 2022, her social media profiles began to be flooded by sexually explicit material from users.
In 2021, Brown began a relationship with actor Jake Bongiovi. In April 2023, Brown announced their engagement. On May 27, 2024, People magazine reported that the couple had married in a private ceremony the previous weekend. Brown also announced that she had chosen to take her husband's last name.
As of August 2022, she has been an online student at Purdue University Global, studying health and human services.
As of August 2023, Brown has a total of ten pets: four dogs, two cats, two tortoises named Becky and David, a rabbit named Eeyore, and a donkey named Bernard. Her dogs include a poodle named Winnie, a Golden retriever named Marley, a mongrel named Pepperoni, and a Cavapoo named Luna. She had an English Mastiff named Dolly who died in 2020. She frequently posts photos of fostered cats and dogs on social media to help them get adopted. In May 2023, Brown announced a long term pet apparel and accessories agreement with Kanine Group subsidiary, Kanine Pets World Limited, in a deal negotiated by Brown's global licensing partner IMG.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music videos ===


=== Video games ===


== Bibliography ==
Brown, Millie Bobby (2023). Nineteen Steps. HarperCollins UK. ISBN 9780008530280.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Millie Bobby Brown at IMDb
Millie Bobby Brown at Rotten Tomatoes