Jacques Bermon Webster II (born April 30, 1991), known professionally as Travis Scott (formerly stylized as Travi$ Scott), is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer. Scott has had four number-one hits on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart, along with a total of over one hundred charting songs. In addition to ten Grammy Award nominations, he has won a Latin Grammy Award, Billboard Music Award, MTV Video Music Award, and several BET Hip Hop Awards. Scott's musical style has been described as a "blend between traditional hip-hop and lo-fi" and often characterized as "ambient," with a heavily appraised influence from rappers Kanye West and Kid Cudi. His stage name is derived from the latter's real name, Scott Mescudi, combined with the name of a favorite uncle.
In 2012, Scott signed his first major-label recording contract with Epic Records, as well as a publishing deal with Kanye West's GOOD Music as an in-house producer. In April 2013, he entered a joint-venture record deal with Georgia-based rapper T.I.'s Grand Hustle Records. Scott self-released his first full-length project, a mixtape titled Owl Pharaoh in 2013, which was followed by his debut mixtape, Days Before Rodeo (2014). His debut studio album, Rodeo (2015), was met with critical and commercial success; it spawned the singles "3500" (featuring Future and 2 Chainz) and "Antidote", the latter peaked at number 16 on the Billboard Hot 100. His second album, Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight (2016), became his first number-one album on the Billboard 200 chart. In the following year, Scott formed the duo Huncho Jack with rapper Quavo, with whom he released an eponymous collaborative album (2017).
Scott's third studio album, Astroworld (2018), was released to widespread critical acclaim and became his second consecutive number-one album on the Billboard 200. It yielded his first Billboard Hot 100 number-one single, "Sicko Mode" (featuring Drake). In late 2019, Scott's vanity label imprint, Cactus Jack Records released the compilation album JackBoys, which also topped the Billboard 200. With his 2019 single "Highest in the Room" and his 2020 singles "The Scotts" (with Kid Cudi) and "Franchise" (featuring Young Thug and M.I.A.), Scott became the first artist on the Billboard Hot 100 to have three songs debut at number one in less than a year. Following a series of controversies and five years after the release of his previous solo album, Scott released Utopia (2023), which became his fourth consecutive number-one album on the Billboard 200 and spawned the Billboard Hot 100 top-ten singles "Meltdown" (featuring Drake), "Fein" (featuring Playboi Carti), and "K-pop" (with Bad Bunny and The Weeknd). In 2025, he released the single "4x4", which peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100.
Along with his highly publicized relationship with American media personality Kylie Jenner, Scott has collaborated with organizations including Nike, Dior, and McDonald's. His Cactus Jack record label, founded in 2017, has signed artists including Don Toliver and Sheck Wes. Scott has gained notoriety for controversies and legal issues regarding concert safety. In November 2021, a mass-casualty crowd crush occurred during Scott's hometown performance at his annual Astroworld Festival, causing ten deaths and hundreds of injuries.


== Early life ==
Jacques Bermon Webster II was born on April 30, 1991, in Houston, Texas. From ages one through six, Webster lived with his grandmother in South Park, Houston. The neighborhood was notorious for crime and had an impact on a young Webster, "Growing up, my grandmother stayed in the 'hood so I seen random crazy shit. [I saw] mad bums and crazy spazzed out motherfuckers, I saw people looking weird, hungry, and grimey [sic]. I was always like, 'I gotta get the fuck out this shit.' It gave me my edge—[it made me] who I am right now."
Webster moved to Missouri City, a middle-class suburban area bordering southwest Houston, to live with his parents. His mother worked for Apple and his father ran his own business. Webster's father is also a soul musician and his grandfather was a jazz composer. Webster attended Elkins High School and graduated at seventeen. During high school, he participated in musical theater. Webster then attended the University of Texas at San Antonio, before dropping out his second year to fully pursue his music career.
During an interview, Webster revealed he chose his moniker as a combination of his favorite uncle, Travis, and the first name of one of his biggest inspirations, Kid Cudi (whose real name is Scott Mescudi).


== Career ==


=== 2008–2012: Career beginnings and record deals ===
Webster formed a duo with his longtime friend Chris Holloway known as The Graduates. In 2008, the duo released their untitled first EP on social networking website Myspace.
The following year, Scott and OG Chess, one of Scott's schoolmates, formed the group The Classmates. The Classmates released two projects, with Buddy Rich in 2009 and Cruis'n USA in 2010. Scott mainly handled production work on both projects. The duo remained together until late 2012, when personal conflicts and financial disputes led to the disbandment of the group.
After leaving college, Scott moved from Houston to Washington Heights in New York City where Scott began working with friend Mike Waxx, who owned the music website Illroots. After moving to New York, Scott slept on the floor at his friend's house and spent most of his time at Just Blaze's studio. Eventually frustrated in New York and the lack of progression, Scott moved to Los Angeles, California, after only four months in the state.
In Los Angeles, Webster was abandoned by his friend who had promised to help him by providing housing. His parents cut him off financially and he eventually was forced to relocate back to Houston, where his parents kicked him out of their home. Webster moved back to Los Angeles once again and began to sleep on the couch of a friend who studied at University of Southern California. Atlanta-based rapper and owner of Grand Hustle Records, T.I. would later hear one of Webster's productions, titled "Lights (Love Sick)". While in Los Angeles, T.I.'s representative contacted Webster, asking him to attend a studio for a meeting. During the meeting, T.I. freestyled over "Animal", one of Webster's productions.


=== 2012–2014: Owl Pharaoh and Days Before Rodeo ===

Scott's First solo full-length project is a mixtape titled Owl Pharaoh, which was set to be released as a free download in 2012. However, the project was delayed, and was announced to be slated for a later release. The project was later re-created by Kanye West and Mike Dean, and was then again delayed for sample clearance issues. In promotion Scott would release the track, "Blocka La Flame", a remix of fellow GOOD Music label-mate Pusha T's single "Blocka" (which features production and vocals from Scott). The song was produced by Young Chop, with additional production by Scott himself, alongside Mike Dean. On March 22, 2013, Scott released the music video for a song titled "Quintana", set to appear on Owl Pharaoh. On March 27, XXL revealed that Scott was a member of their Freshman Class of 2013. Later on March 29, 2013, following his interview with British disc jockey, DJ Semtex, Scott premiered a snippet of his commercial debut single, titled "Upper Echelon", featuring 2 Chainz and T.I. On April 2, 2013, Scott stated Owl Pharaoh was his official debut mixtape and would be released on the iTunes Store on May 21, 2013. On April 23, 2013, "Upper Echelon" was sent to urban contemporary radio.

On March 13, 2014, Scott performed a new song, tentatively titled "1975" featuring Big Sean, from his upcoming project at the time, at the Texan music festival South by Southwest (SXSW). Scott later confirmed via his Twitter account that the song is not called "1975", and would be included on his second mixtape, titled Days Before Rodeo. He would later take to his Twitter account to announce Rodeo, as the official title for his major-label debut studio album. On May 5, 2014, Scott released the full version of the song, with its new title "Don't Play", featuring a sample of the song "M.O.N.E.Y" by the English rock band the 1975. On July 11, 2014, "Don't Play" was officially released as the lead single from Days Before Rodeo, via digital distribution.
Following the success of Days Before Rodeo, Scott announced that he would headline a concert tour, called The Rodeo Tour, with rapper Young Thug and producer Metro Boomin. The tour started on March 1, 2015, in Santa Ana, California, and ended on April 1, 2015, in Portland, Oregon. The tour ran through major cities and artists such as Kanye West, Chris Brown, Wale and Birdman made special guest appearances in certain cities.


=== 2015–2016: Rodeo and Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight ===

Rodeo was released on September 4, 2015, by Grand Hustle and Epic Records. The album features guest appearances from Quavo, Juicy J, Kanye West, The Weeknd, Swae Lee, Chief Keef, Justin Bieber, Young Thug and Toro y Moi, and includes production from Mike Dean, Kanye West, WondaGurl, Suber, DJ Dahi, Metro Boomin, 1500 or Nothin', Sonny Digital, Southside, Terrace Martin, Zaytoven, Pharrell Williams and Scott himself, among others. The album was supported by two singles: "3500" featuring Future and 2 Chainz, and "Antidote". The latter became his highest-charting single on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, peaking at number 16. Rodeo received generally positive reviews from critics and debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart. It also debuted at number one on the Billboard Rap Albums chart.

On January 4, 2016, Scott announced that he has a new studio album on the way. On March 29, 2016, 300 Entertainment executive Lyor Cohen, revealed that Scott and Young Thug were releasing a single together and called Scott's upcoming album a "classic". On April 7, 2016, Scott previewed a single with Young Thug at one of his shows. On May 17, 2016, Scott announced that the title of his second album would be Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight, while also confirming the title for his third album to be Astroworld. On June 3, 2016, the collaborative single between Thug and Scott was released, titled "Pick Up the Phone". The single, which also features vocals from Quavo of Atlanta-based rap trio Migos, reached number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
On August 31, 2016, Scott announced that Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight was finally finished in a post on Instagram. Scott premiered the album on his third episode of .wav radio on September 2, 2016, and was later released on iTunes and Apple Music. On September 11, 2016, the album became Scott's first number one album on the U.S. Billboard 200. On September 12, 2016, Universal Music Publishing Group's CEO, Jody Gerson announced that the label signed a worldwide deal with Scott.
In the same episode Scott premiered Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight, he also announced that he would be executive producing on Kanye West's Cruel Winter, a follow-up to his G.O.O.D. Music label's debut compilation Cruel Summer. In the episode he described the upcoming album as, "very youthful, straight to the point, like the illest ever, man, like the illest album".


=== 2017–2018: Cactus Jack Records, Huncho Jack, Jack Huncho, and Astroworld ===

Scott performed at All-Star Weekend on February 16, 2017, in New Orleans, Louisiana at Champion Square. He also performed at New Orleans BUKU Music + Art Project festival on March 10, 2017. On March 5, Scott announced a concert tour called "Birds Eye View". The next day, the dates and cities for the tour were unveiled, with it beginning on March 10, in New Orleans, Louisiana, and coming to an end on June 2, in Eugene, Oregon. In the same month, Scott was also featured alongside American rapper Quavo from the hip-hop group Migos on Canadian rapper Drake's single "Portland", from Drake's commercial mixtape, More Life. The song peaked at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100, becoming his first top ten song as a featured artist. In March 2017, Scott announced he would be launching his own imprint, under the name of Cactus Jack Records.
On April 3, 2017, it was reported Scott had been working on a collaborative studio album with Quavo, potentially to be released later in 2017. Speaking to GQ, he confirmed: 'The Quavo album is coming soon. I'm dropping new music soon. You know how I do it though: I like surprises. In addition to the collaborative album, Scott announced his third studio album Astroworld, named after the defunct Houston theme park of the same name, was nearing completion and would most likely be released in 2017.
On May 16, 2017, Scott released three new tracks on SoundCloud, after teasing on social media for some time. The tracks were named "A Man", "Green & Purple (featuring Playboi Carti)", and "Butterfly Effect". The latter was also released on every other streaming service, as the only track. On June 15, 2017, Scott announced he would be doing a European leg of the "Birds Eye View Tour". The European leg started on the June 23 in Paris, and concluded on July 9 in Turku, Finland. This leg was mainly festival sets or in smaller club settings. The music video for "Butterfly Effect" was released on July 14, 2017. On August 10, 2017, Scott tweeted "ALBUM MODE" as he had just finished the "DAMN. Tour" as a supporting act for Kendrick Lamar, the night before. This tweet signified that he was now working on his album AstroWorld full-time. On August 27, 2017, Scott performed with Thirty Seconds to Mars at the 2017 MTV Video Music Awards on their single "Walk On Water".

On September 18, 2017, Quavo and Migos did an interview, in which Quavo stated that his album with Scott was coming "real soon". He also stated that he and Scott had over 20 records ready. In October 2017, Scott was featured in a special piece titled "Deserve", by Chinese born Canadian rapper Kris Wu. On December 7, 2017, a clip of Quavo being interviewed by Zane Lowe was posted on the official Twitter account for Beats 1. When asked about the title of their upcoming project, he confirmed it would be Huncho Jack, Jack Huncho.
On December 6, 2017, Scott was featured on fellow American rapper and singer Trippie Redd's single "Dark Knight Dummo", the lead single from the latter's debut studio album, Life's a Trip. The song peaked at 72 on the Billboard Hot 100. On December 21, 2017, Scott and Quavo released their collaborative studio album, Huncho Jack, Jack Huncho, under the name "Huncho Jack", a name which comes from Quavo's nickname "Huncho" and a play on Scott's first name "Jack". The album debuted at number 3 on the Billboard 200 and had seven tracks chart on the Billboard Hot 100. After the release of Huncho Jack, Jack Huncho, Webster was spotted in the studio a lot more frequently and Billboard slated an expected first quarter release for AstroWorld.
On May 4, 2018, four days after his 27th birthday, Scott released a single titled "Watch" featuring American rappers Lil Uzi Vert and Kanye West. The single was released as promotional material for his third studio album Astroworld. Astroworld was released on August 3, 2018, to critical acclaim, and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200. "Sicko Mode", the album's second single, peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Scott's highest charting solo single. On the same month of the album's launch, Scott announced that he was going to launch Astroworld Festival, a music festival with the same name as the album. The festival took place on November 17. On November 2, 2018, Scott was featured on five tracks of Metro Boomin's debut studio album, Not All Heroes Wear Capes: "Overdue", "Dreamcatcher" (alongside Swae Lee), "Up to Something" (alongside Young Thug), "Only 1 (Interlude)", and "No More" (alongside Kodak Black and 21 Savage), as well as background vocals on "Space Cadet" (featuring Gunna). In December, Billboard reported that Scott was to make a guest appearance at the Super Bowl LIII halftime show during Maroon 5's set.


=== 2019–2020: Look Mom I Can Fly, JackBoys, and "The Scotts" ===

On April 18, 2019, Scott released a single with SZA and The Weeknd for the popular HBO series Game of Thrones. It is titled "Power is Power" and is a reference to a scene that took place in the first episode of the show's second season. The track is the second song on the Game of Thrones soundtrack album entitled For the Throne. On May 23, 2019, Scott was featured alongside J. Cole on Young Thug's single, "The London", which later appeared as the lead single on Thug's debut studio album, So Much Fun. On August 28, 2019, Scott's documentary film, Look Mom I Can Fly, was released on Netflix. On October 4, 2019, Scott released a single, "Highest in the Room", which debuted and peaked at number one on the Hot 100, being his first song to debut at the top and his second number one following "Sicko Mode" in 2018. The same month, Scott was also featured on the remix of Young Thug's single, "Hot" with Gunna, who was featured on the original song as well. The song was later added to the deluxe edition of So Much Fun in December of that year. Scott also was featured on the track "Hop Off a Jet" from the deluxe edition.
On December 2, 2019, Scott announced a compilation album with his Cactus Jack label members, consisting of Don Toliver, Sheck Wes and producer Chase B, titled JackBoys. On December 24, Scott revealed the album's release date via Instagram. The album was released on December 27, 2019, and featured a remix of "Highest in the Room" featuring Spanish singer Rosalía and American rapper Lil Baby, the latter's verse being leaked months prior. On the same day, Scott released the music video for "Gang Gang" performed by Wes, with uncredited vocals and cameo appearances from Scott, Toliver, and rapper Luxury Tax 50. On December 30, 2019, Scott released the music video for "Gatti", featuring Pop Smoke. On March 20, 2020, Scott released the music video for "Out West", featuring Young Thug.
Scott performed five virtual live shows in the video game Fortnite Battle Royale from April 23 to 25, 2020 with visuals based on his Astroworld tour. It received more than 27 million viewers and boosted the sales of Fortnite-branded Cactus Jack products such as action figures. The performance also included the premiere of his new song with Kid Cudi, who released the song, "The Scotts", as a duo under the same name. Tying with the performance, numerous cosmetic items for player avatars based on Scott and the concert were available to purchase by players of Fortnite Battle Royale. The song debuted at number-one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Scott's third U.S. number-one. In May he collaborated for a second time with Rosalía on her track "TKN", where he raps in Spanish for the first time. Scott was on the cover of GQ's September 2020 issue, and revealed he will be releasing a collaborative album with Kid Cudi. This follows their number-one single, "The Scotts", released earlier in May.
On the second anniversary of his third studio album Astroworld, Scott teased he was working on a new project. On August 22, 2020, Scott released the single "The Plan", the theme song to Christopher Nolan's film Tenet. He released the single "Franchise" featuring rappers Young Thug and M.I.A. on September 25, 2020. The song was previously previewed on Scott and Chase B's WAV radio, titled "White Tee". It debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and Scott became the first artist in Billboard chart history to have three songs debut at number one in less than a year. A remix with an additional feature from American rapper Future, was released on October 7, 2020.


=== 2021–present: Return to performing and Utopia ===

From mid to late-2020, Scott began teasing his fourth studio album Utopia. On January 15, 2021, Scott released a remix of "Goosebumps" with producer HVME. After canceling the third annual Astroworld Fest due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Scott announced the return of the festival in 2021 and expanded it to a multi day format. On April 30, Scott was collaborated with Baby Keem on the song "Durag Activity" from his album The Melodic Blue. In June, Scott announced a collaboration between Dior and Cactus Jack for the 2022 Summer Men's collection. 
On August 28, Scott was featured on Kanye West's tenth studio album Donda on the song "Praise God" also with Baby Keem. On September 3, Scott appeared on Drake's Certified Lover Boy on the song "Fair Trade", which peaked in the top 10 of the Hot 100 at number three. On October 8, Don Toliver released an album Life of a Don, which featured Scott on songs titled "Flocky Flocky" and "You". On October 30, 2021, Scott closed out day 3 of Rolling Loud NYC. During the set he performed the unreleased song "Escape Plan" and a preview of another unreleased track off Utopia. In November 2021, he announced new music to be released on November 5, 2021; he was believed to release a project reportedly titled Dystopia, but instead he released a two-song single "Escape Plan / Mafia".
On April 22, 2022, Scott was featured on his first song since the Astroworld Festival crowd crush, "Hold That Heat" alongside Future and producer Southside. On April 27, 2022, the Primavera Sound festival announced that Scott is scheduled to perform at their festivals held in Buenos Aires, Santiago, and São Paulo respectively. On May 15, 2022, he performed at the 2022 Billboard Music Awards. This performance was his first since the Astroworld Festival tragedy in 2021. On August 6, 2022, Scott performed his first solo show since the Astroworld Festival tragedy at The O2 Arena in London. That month, it was also announced that Scott would begin a Las Vegas nightclub residency titled "Road to Utopia" in September. On December 2, Scott appeared on Metro Boomin's second studio album Heroes & Villains in four tracks including "Raindrops (Insane)", "Trance" (alongside Young Thug), "Niagara Falls (Foot or 2)" (alongside 21 Savage), and "Lock on Me" (alongside Future), as well as background vocals on "Creepin'" (with The Weeknd and 21 Savage).
On March 19, 2023, Scott and DJ Calvin Harris performed at MDLBEAST in Jeddah, on the eve of the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix. On July 21, 2023, Scott released the lead single to Utopia, "K-pop" with Bad Bunny and The Weeknd. On July 28, Scott released Utopia consisting of 19 tracks and alongside his debut directal musical film Circus Maximus which he also wrote and starred in. Utopia featured KayCyy, Teezo Touchdown, Bon Iver, Sampha, Drake, Playboi Carti, Sheck Wes, Beyoncé, Rob49, 21 Savage, the Weeknd, Yung Lean, Young Thug, James Blake, Westside Gunn, Kid Cudi, Bad Bunny, Future, and SZA. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming his fourth consecutive album to do so (including JackBoys).
On February 4, 2024, Scott performed at the 2024 Grammy Awards. Scott performed "My Eyes", "Fein", and "I Know?" from Utopia, which was nominated for Rap Album of the year. His performance of "Fein" was accompanied by guest Playboi Carti, who features on the album version of the song, but caused controversy as Scott was heard referencing his 10 nominations without a victory at the award show that year.
On August 18, 2024, in celebration of the 10th anniversary of Days Before Rodeo, Scott announced that a remastered version of the mixtape would be released on August 23. This marked the first time that the complete mixtape was available on streaming platforms. The mixtape would debut at number two on the Billboard 200, with 361,000 album-equivalent units (331,000 in pure album sales)—debuting below Sabrina Carpenter's  album Short n' Sweet which debuted atop the chart with 1,000 more units (362,000). The mixtape would drop to number 30 in its second week, and then dropped to number 106 in its third week. Days Before Rodeo would jump 105 positions to the number-one spot in its fourth week, earning 156,000 album-equivalent units—this became the ninth-largest jump to number one on the Billboard 200.
On January 24, 2025, Scott released the single "4×4". He was on Hurry Up Tomorrow.


== Other ventures ==


=== Cactus Jack Records ===

Cactus Jack Records is an American record label founded by Scott in 2017. It is distributed by Epic Records. The label also has its own publishing division Cactus Jack Publishing.
Don Toliver is a fellow Houston artist who Travis signed to the label in 2018. Shortly before announcing the deal, Toliver dropped his first major label project, Donny Womack. He gained recognition for his guest appearance on Travis' Astroworld cut, "Can't Say". Chase B is Travis Scott's DJ, as well as an artist in his own right. Sheck Wes signed to the label shortly after picking up buzz early in his career. Wes released his debut album, Mudboy in 2018 and worked with Cactus Jack labelmates on Astroworld, as well as Chase B's 2019 single, "Mayday", which also features Young Thug. Cactus Jack Records also represents producers Chase B and WondaGurl. Rapper SoFaygo signed to Cactus Jack Records in 2020. Later in 2021, Scott signed Malu Trevejo to Cactus Jack Records. Trevejo signed to Travis Scott's label in partnership with Atlantic Records.

During an interview regarding the label, Scott said, I want first and foremost to help other artists, launch new names, to provide opportunities. I want to do for them what happened to me, but better. By better I mean no bullshit. No lying to the artists about album release dates or the budgets of videos and albums.


=== Astroworld Festival ===

Following the release of Astroworld, Scott announced the Astroworld Festival, an annual festive concert that would take place across the street from the former site of Six Flags AstroWorld. The 2018 Astroworld Festival contained appearances from Post Malone, Lil Wayne, Young Thug, Rae Sremmurd, Gunna, Houston All Stars, Sheck Wes, Metro Boomin, Trippie Redd, Smokepurpp, Virgil Abloh, and Tommy Genesis.


=== Fashion ===
Scott was introduced to the creative side of the fashion industry due to his personal stylish pairings of high-end fashion and streetwear. This caught the early attention of brands like Been Trill, Diamond Supply Co., and A Bathing Ape. Travis's liking for camp designs made its way into his collaboration with Been Trill. It was a well-recognized label/DJ collective founded by Virgil Abloh, Matthew Williams, Heron Preston, and Justin Saunders.
In 2015, Scott's collaborated with A Bathing Ape (BAPE) and marked his first project with the popular streetwear brand. His collection with BAPE consists of three pieces: a shark hoodie, a long-sleeve tee, and a t-shirt. In addition, Scott added a touch of "La Flame" on the ape logo head to give it his signature appeal. Later in 2016, Diamond Supply Co., a California-based streetwear brand, collaborated with Scott to launch a clothing collection. The collection was designed by Scott. The Collab consisted of graphic tees, long-sleeve tees, hoodies, coach jackets, and dad hats. In 2017, The Houston Rockets officially announced a collaboration with Travis Scott for Game 6 of the Western Conference Semifinals vs. San Antonio on Thursday, May 11. All fans in attendance at Toyota Center received a t-shirt personally designed by Travis Scott, featuring the Rockets playoff slogan, "Run as One", in his handwriting, along with call outs to the artist.
On April 30, 2019, Scott announced a collaboration with Nike to release his Cactus Jack Air Jordan 1's in May that year. In 2020, Scott partnered with Evisu, a Japanese denim brand founded by Hidehiko Yamane in 1991. On June 24, 2021, Scott announced a collaboration with Dior for a menswear collection that is scheduled to be released in the summer of 2021. A live stream showcasing the collection was released on June 25. The live stream also showcased snippets of songs from his upcoming fourth studio album Utopia featuring a song with Westside Gunn and instrumentals from the album. In later 2022, Scott and Skepta, a British grime MC, rapper, and record producer, headlined an event hosted by Virgil Abloh Securities. The one-day music festival was held at the FPL Solar Amphitheater in Miami, Florida, U.S. The event took place to honor the late Virgil Abloh's legacy called Mirror Mirror. Since then, Scott has partnered both creatively and as the face of several clothing lines for luxury fashion houses like Helmut Lang and Saint Laurent.


=== Notable Sneaker collaborations ===
Scott's sneakers collections are listed below:

Helmut Lang, launched in 2017
Jordan Trunner LX, launched in 2017
Nike Air Force 1, launched in 2017
Air Jordan 4 "Cactus Jack", launched in 2018
Air Jordan 4 "Purple Suede", launched in 2018
Air Jordan 4 "Olive", launched in 2018
Nike Air Force 1 "Sail," launched in 2018
Air Jordan 1, launched in 2019
Air Jordan 1 Low "Grammy", launched in 2019
Air Jordan 33, launched in 2019
Air Jordan 6, launched in 2019
Air Jordan 1 Low, launched in 2019
Nike Air Force 1, launched in 2019
Nike SB Dunk Low, launched in 2020
Nike Air Max 270 React ENG, launched in 2020
Air Jordan 6 "British Khaki", launched in 2021
Air Jordan 1 High OG x Fragment, launched on June 29, 2021
Air Jordan 1 Low OG x Fragment, launched on August 13, 2021
Air Jordan 1 High OG, launched in 2021
Nike Air Max 1, launched in 2022
Nike Air Trainer 1, launched in 2022
Air Jordan 1 Low "Reverse Mocha", launched in 2022
Dior B713, launched in 2022


=== Fortnite collaborations ===
In 2020, Scott and his Cactus Jack team collaborated with Epic Games to launch new merchandise inspired by the Fortnite game, including clothing, action figures, and Nerf guns. Scott and Epic Games also set records with the success of Scott's "Astronomical 'Fortnite'" event. Scott has also played a live concert within Fortnite which drew millions of views. The collaboration ended in 2021.


=== McDonald's ===

In September 2020, Scott collaborated with McDonald's to launch a limited edition meal that was introduced in participating McDonald's restaurants in North America, named "The Travis Scott" and a variation on their Quarter Pounder with Cheese. The partnership marked the first nationally distributed celebrity-endorsed McDonald's meal in the chain's history, and the first celebrity meal since 1992, when McDonald's launched a "McJordan" burger with Michael Jordan in the Chicago metropolitan area. Due to high demand, some McDonald's branches ran out of ingredients tied to the promotion, causing a break in the supply chain. Scott and McDonald's also launched a line of McDonald's and Cactus Jack–branded merchandise, including a number of clothing items, a rug, and a McNugget-shaped body pillow. This popularized the celebrity meal craze, which would later be done similarly by BTS and Saweetie. The idea was exported to Europe in the fall of 2021, with Spanish singer Aitana serving as the first European act to have its own McDonald's meal.


=== PlayStation ===
In October 2020, Scott announced he was joining the PlayStation team as a Strategic Creative Partner to promote the PlayStation 5 console. Together, they released special merchandise, which includes a previously unseen version of Nike Dunk Lows. They also uploaded a special unboxing video of the PlayStation 5 console to YouTube. The video features footage of Scott playing the console alongside fans, a piano performance by James Blake, and a tribute to Pop Smoke.


=== The Scotts ===
Aside from his solo musical career, Scott is also one-half of the alternative hip-hop super-duo the Scotts, alongside his mentor and frequent collaborator, American musician Kid Cudi. They have currently been working on their debut collaborative effort since 2020, when the duo released the Billboard Hot 100 number one single, "The Scotts". In December 2022, Cudi revealed they were no longer working on the album, effectively announcing its cancellation. However in July 2023, Cudi stated the album “is [definitely] happening at some point.”


=== Film industry ===
Scott made his theatrical debut in the 2021 film Gully as a movie store owner. He also contributed to the film's soundtrack but his song "Knife" was cut due to sampling issues, but was still featured briefly in the film. On August 2, 2021, Scott signed a movie production deal with A24. The same day he announced the completion of a draft for a film based on his then-upcoming fourth studio album Utopia, which would later be revealed to be Circus Maximus.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===

Scott has stated that Björk is "one of my biggest inspirations for why I do what I do". He is also influenced by Bon Iver, Kid Cudi, M.I.A., Kanye West, Toro y Moi, Tame Impala, T.I., and Thom Yorke.


=== Musical style ===
Scott makes heavy use of audio manipulation effects such as Auto-Tune, phasing, delays, and stereo-sculpted chorusing and harmony structures, predominantly influenced by producers Mike Dean and Alex Tumay. Scott's musical style has been characterized as "ambient"; Scott himself has said "I'm not hip-hop". Vulture described Scott's sound as "unremittingly dark, syncretic, hi-res, and above all unnatural". Scott's musical style has been described as being hip-hop, "psychedelic" trap, and pop rap. Spin magazine compared his debut mixtape Owl Pharaoh (2013) to fellow American rapper Kid Cudi's Man on the Moon II: The Legend of Mr. Rager (2010).


== Creative vision ==
In 2016, Harmony Korine, an American filmmaker, teamed with Scott and fellow American rapper Gucci Mane to release a collaborative music video for their collaboration "Last Time"; Korine made a cameo appearance in the short directed by David Helman.
In 2018, Scott has said that he is a fan of Broadway theatre and would like to do an album of show tune covers. He has said that he would like to write his own musical in the future.
In 2021, Scott starred in a cover story of i-D Magazine Issue 362 "Utopia in Dystopia" photographed by Spike Jonze. Scott graced two covers for the issue, including a limited-edition cover featuring original artwork by Jonze. Scott teamed up with i-D Magazine for a limited edition merch capsule release. Scott added his original signature artwork to the special edition issue of the magazine. His classic scrawled artwork also makes an appearance on the Travis Scott X i-D collaborative merch.
Scott has also collaborated with the photographer David LaChappelle. Scott's album Astroworld's cover art was reportedly shot by LaChappelle. The artwork featured a large golden replica of Scott's head.


== Philanthropy ==


=== Cactus Jack Foundation ===
Scott established the Cactus Jack Foundation in November 2020 to assist Houston youth with education expenses and creative endeavors. In December 2021, the foundation gave out thousands of toys to the children of Houston. On May 17, 2022, Scott announced that he would give away $1 million in scholarships to 100 HBCU college students from the graduating class of 2022 through the Cactus Jack Foundation.


=== Project Heal ===
In 2022, Scott launched a multi-tier, long-term series of community-focused philanthropy and investment efforts called Project HEAL through his Cactus Jack Foundation. The philanthropic effort provided $5 million for community-based initiatives in Scott's home state of Texas. Project HEAL is a multi-tier initiative dedicated to addressing challenges facing today's youth, especially those from marginalized and at-risk communities.


== Personal life ==
Scott began dating media personality and businesswoman Kylie Jenner in April 2017. In February 2018, Jenner gave birth to their daughter. Jenner appeared in the music video for "Stop Trying to Be God", from Scott's third studio album Astroworld. They broke up in September 2019, but quarantined together during the COVID-19 pandemic for the sake of their daughter and ended up rekindling their relationship. On September 7, 2021, after weeks of speculation, Jenner revealed that she and Scott were expecting their second child. Jenner gave birth to their son in February 2022. The couple separated for a second time by January 2023.


== Legal issues ==


=== Incidents at performances ===
Scott's performances have experienced a number of issues. At Lollapalooza in 2015, Scott was charged and arrested for disorderly conduct after inciting concertgoers to ignore security and rush the stage. For this, he would later plead guilty to reckless conduct and receive one year of supervised release. That same year, at the Openair Festival in Switzerland, he encouraged fans to attack a man who took his shoe while he was crowd-surfing, by stopping the concert and repeatedly telling the crowd to "fuck him up", while also spitting on him.
In 2017, he was arrested for similar conduct to his Lollapalooza behavior after a performance at the Walmart Arkansas Music Pavilion in Northwest Arkansas. That same year, a fan sued Scott and the organizers of a 2017 concert at Terminal 5 in Manhattan after falling from a balcony and being dragged on stage, blaming the fall on a crowd surge. In 2019, three people were trampled and injured as a crowd rushed to enter the compound at Astroworld.


==== Astroworld Festival crowd crush ====

On November 5, 2021, at least ten people died and hundreds were injured in a crowd crush moving toward the stage during Scott's performance at the Astroworld Festival in NRG Park in his hometown of Houston, Texas. On the first night, a crowd crush occurred, resulting in the cancellation of the second night of the festival.  In video footage of the incident, Scott is seen continuing to perform despite chants from the crowd pleading for him to stop; observing at least one audience member had been hurt, then ordering security for a brief moment to "help, jump in real quick, keep going", only to continue with the rest of the show for the following hour; encouraging people to "get wild" and "crazy", despite an ambulance passing through the crowd that was pulling out lifeless bodies. Victims killed ranged from 9 to 27 years old.
Shortly after, a lawsuit was announced by the concertgoers. It was started by Kristian Paredes, who filed for $1,000,000 due to the injuries he received. On June 29, 2023, a Texas grand jury declined to indict Scott in a criminal probe of the crowd surge.


==== Nebula assault allegations ====
On March 1, 2023, Scott was performing at Nebula, a nightclub in New York City, alongside Don Toliver when a sound technician, identified only as Mark, asked Scott to lower the music as it was too loud for the venue's size. Scott reportedly responded by giving Mark the middle finger and punching him in the head, resulting in Mark needing medical attention and police being called to the scene around 3:25 a.m. Scott had reportedly been drinking alcohol and damaged $12,000 in the club's sound equipment before he left the premises. The New York City Police Department (NYPD) issued a warrant for Scott's arrest in relation to the incident on March 2, 2023. The matter was resolved with a settlement reached and the NYPD not pressing any charges.


=== Miami Beach arrest ===
In the early hours of June 20, 2024, Scott was arrested in Miami Beach on charges of disorderly intoxication and trespassing property after warning. He was released over six hours later after posting a $650 bond. The same day, Scott would capitalize on this incident by unleashing merchandise containing his mugshot which was taken following the arrest. In August, prosecutors dropped Scott's disorderly intoxication charge whilst continuing to press charges for trespassing after warning.


=== Paris arrest ===
In the early hours of August 9, 2024, Scott was arrested in Paris after allegedly getting into a fight with his bodyguard. A security guard at the luxury George V hotel where Scott was staying at intervened, which prompted Scott to attack the security guard as well. Scott was released without charges the following day.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Rodeo (2015)
Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight (2016)
Astroworld (2018)
Utopia (2023)
Collaborative albums

Huncho Jack, Jack Huncho (with Quavo as Huncho Jack) (2017)
JackBoys (with Cactus Jack Records) (2019)


== Filmography ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== Tours ==
Headlining

Rodeo Tour (2015)
Birds Eye View Tour (2017)
Astroworld: Wish You Were Here Tour (2018–2019)
Astroworld Festival (also known as Astrofest) (2018–2019, 2021)
Circus Maximus Tour (2023–2024)
Supporting

Never Sober Tour (with Juicy J and Project Pat) (2015)
The Madness Fall Tour (with The Weeknd and Banks) (2015)
Anti World Tour (with Rihanna) (2016)
The Damn. Tour (with Kendrick Lamar and DRAM) (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Travis Scott at AllMusic
Travis Scott discography at Discogs
Travis Scott discography at MusicBrainz
Travis Scott at IMDb
Travis Scott on Spotify
Travis Scott on Telegram