Kylie Kelce (née McDevitt; born March 23, 1992) is an American podcast host and media personality. She is the creator and host of the podcast Not Gonna Lie, which debuted at the top of podcast charts in December 2024.


== Early life and education ==
McDevitt was born in 1992 in Narberth, Pennsylvania. She began playing field hockey in the second grade. She experienced hip issues during her time at Lower Merion High School that required surgery, allowing her to continue playing without pain.
McDevitt attended Montgomery County Community College before transferring to Cabrini University. At Cabrini, she majored in communications and expressed an interest in pursuing a career in sports broadcasting. During her time at Cabrini, McDevitt was a member of the field hockey team, which competed at the NCAA Division III level. A four-year starter on defense, she was recognized as the Colonial States Athletic Conference (CSAC) Rookie of the Year and received All-CSAC honors four times, including three first-team selections. She graduated in 2017.


== Career ==
Kelce was head coach of the field hockey team at her alma mater, Lower Merion High School. 
Kelce supports the Eagles Autism Foundation by helping to organize an annual fundraising event at Ocean Drive in Sea Isle City, New Jersey, and by making personal financial contributions. She was in Amazon's documentary Kelce, which followed her husband Jason Kelce's life during the 2022 Philadelphia Eagles season. She appeared in the film while pregnant with the couple's third child.


=== "Not Gonna Lie" Podcast ===
Kelce started a podcast, Not Gonna Lie, in December 2024. The podcast, produced by Wave Sports + Entertainment, debuted at the top of podcast charts on platforms like Spotify and Apple. The show includes weekly interviews with guests from pop culture, sports, and entertainment, as well as discussions on topics such as modern parenting, social media, and women in sports. Kelce announced the podcast as an opportunity to address public interest in her family and provide her perspective on various issues.
In January 2025, Kelce responded to critics of her podcast Not Gonna Lie, including fans of Joe Rogan, whose show she surpassed in the charts. She humorously explained how algorithms amplify engagement, noting that critics searching her name only boost her online presence. Laughing off claims her podcast is “amateur,” she quipped that she has said the same herself.


== Personal life ==
In 2014, Kylie McDevitt met Jason Kelce using the dating app Tinder. They married in Philadelphia on April 14, 2018. They have three daughters and, as of 2024, are expecting their fourth. She contributed vocals alongside her husband to the song "Loud Little Town" on the 2024 charity Christmas album A Philly Special Christmas Party.
In May 2024, she delivered a commencement speech at Cabrini University during the institution's final graduation ceremony. In her speech, she reflected on her experiences as a parent and Cabrini alumna.
In December 2024, Kelce shared that she is a Democrat whose views "aggressively lean" to the left.


== References ==