Bonnie Blue (born 1999) is an English pornographic actress and OnlyFans creator. After diversifying into producing content with students and married men, she made several appearances on podcasts in 2024 which generated several weeks of backlash on Twitter; a subsequent appearance on This Morning prompted 188 complaints to Ofcom. She was later banned from Australia and Fiji for working without an appropriate visa. In January 2025, an advert by a company claiming to be from an affiliate of Stake featuring Blue was the subject of a letter to the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport.


== Life and career ==
Blue was born in 1999 and lived in Stapleford in Nottinghamshire before moving to Australia in 2021. Prior to entering the sex industry, she had married and worked in recruitment. In 2023, she started as a webcam model before moving to OnlyFans after making more money than expected. She then began earning money by filming herself having sex with 18- and 19-year-old students, as they were her target audience. She later supplemented her money-for-sex income with married men after a student's father became jealous, and then began making money via sex with lecturers.
In 2024, she visited Cancún in March and then schoolies week in Australia and freshers' week in the UK. For the latter, she posted her address online and allowed men to queue to have sex with her at no cost, so long as they consented to it being filmed and used in her online content. She toured Nottingham and Derby in September and Birmingham in October, each for a week. Also in 2024, she made a number of appearances on podcasts, including Dream On with Lottie Moss and Saving Grace with GK Barry. Clips of her appearances, in which she claimed to have slept with "hundreds" of "barely legal" students, went viral online and generated significant backlash on Twitter over several weeks, with some questioning what repercussions her co-stars could suffer and others accusing her of manipulation. Some also argued that filming and distributing amateur pornography featuring 18- and 19-year-olds was a moral grey area.
Blue later stated that those complaining about the young age of her co-stars should instead encourage the government of the United Kingdom to increase the country's age of consent and attributed the reaction to Saving Grace on the podcast's female audience, prompting others to accuse her of misogyny. She later reiterated her stance on married men on The Kyle and Jackie O Show. Barry later deleted the episode. In November 2024, Blue appeared on the ITV daytime show This Morning, in which she debated against Ashley James over the promotion of her content. Blue's appearance on the show drew 188 complaints to Ofcom. James later wrote a piece for Grazia stating that she had debated Blue, as she had found previous interviews lacking on the grounds that women had not challenged her, and men had only done so on grounds she considered patriarchal such as her body count or the opinion of her father. Claire Hubble of the i wrote that Blue's virality was "a reflection of the outrage economy" and compared her success to that of Katie Hopkins, while journalist Sophie Wilkinson described her as "a cog in a far bigger machine" and "want[ed] to know who hurt her".
In January 2025, she claimed to have had sex with 1,057 men in one day, prompting Gareth Roberts of The Spectator to compare her to Andrew Tate and assert that both encouraged "bad male behaviours", Eli Cugini of Dazed to criticise tabloids for their coverage of both Blue's stunt and Lily Phillips's I Slept With 100 Men In One Day stunt, and Katherine Ryan to state on an episode of her podcast that the men queuing for them were "losers". Wilkinson, this time writing for Elle, wrote that both Blue and the 4B movement were "highly-publicised and extreme responses to our sexual culture" and that Blue had "given hypersexualisation a figurehead", while Victoria Smith of UnHerd wrote that what Blue was selling "misogyny" and "dehumanisation". Olivia Attwood, Olivia Petter of The Independent, and Felicity Martin of Glamour subsequently wondered why Blue and Phillips were being shamed but not the men who queued to have sex with them, while Eva Wiseman of The Guardian wrote that "the intentions and morals of these men were not of interest, because… it’s normal". Martin also drew comparisons with G-Eazy's "Lady Killers II" and wrote that comparisons with Tate contributed towards "minimis[ing] the very real and serious abuse of women", while Petter worried "about the landscape their behaviour creates for other women, particularly teenagers" and both drew comparisons with the men who queued to rape Gisèle Pelicot. By the time of Martin's report, Blue and Phillips had filmed a video opening their front door to a large group of hooded men.
Later that month, The Daily Telegraph reported that Will Prochaska, of the Campaign to End Gambling Ads, had written to Lisa Nandy, Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, demanding that she instruct the Gambling Commission to act on an advert uploaded to Twitter in December 2024 by a company claiming to be affiliated with the gambling company Stake; the video featured Blue claiming to have had sex with "barely legal 18 year olds" at Nottingham University and had been deleted by the time of The Daily Telegraph's report.


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


=== Podcasts ===


=== Pornographic films ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Bonnie Blue at IMDb