Mohammed Mustafa Amer (Arabic: محمد عامر; born July 24, 1981) is a Palestinian American stand-up comedian. He is known for his Netflix comedy special Mo Amer: The Vagabond and as a member of the comedy trio Allah Made Me Funny. Amer also appeared in the Hulu sitcom Ramy for two seasons, where he played the character Mo, Ramy's cousin who owns a diner. Additionally, he starred in the film Black Adam and created and stars in the Netflix series [[Mo (TV series), which is loosely based on his experiences as a Palestinian refugee. The show was released in August 2022. Amer also hosted the 2023 season of Doha Debates' flagship series, filmed in Qatar's Education City.


== Early life ==
Amer is Palestinian and the youngest of six children. His father worked as an engineer for the Kuwait Oil Company. Amer attended a British school in Kuwait, where he learned English with a British accent.
At the age of 9, Amer, along with his siblings and mother, fled Kuwait during the Gulf War and immigrated to the United States, settling in Houston, Texas. He was placed in an ESL class, despite already being proficient in English.
In 1992, Amer's father, a telecom engineer, joined the family in the United States. Amer attended Piney Point Elementary School. One of his brothers became a pilot, and another earned a PhD in biochemistry. Amer's father passed away in 1995 when Amer was 14 years old, leading to a period of academic struggles. A teacher later encouraged him to pursue comedy as an outlet for his grief.


== Career ==
At age 10, Amer attended a Bill Cosby performance at the Houston Astrodome, and four years later, he discovered stand-up comedy at a Texas rodeo. An English teacher encouraged him to perform a monologue from Shakespeare in exchange for improving his grades, leading to Amer's interest in comedy. He began participating in high school theater and eventually started performing stand-up comedy by impersonating family members. Amer refined his comedic skills at Houston's comedy clubs while working at a flag manufacturing company.
In June 1999, Amer participated in Houston's Funniest Person Contest and reached the finals. He was then directed to The Comedy Showcase, where the owner, Danny Martinez, mentored him in stand-up comedy. By age 19, Amer was performing for U.S. troops stationed abroad, becoming one of the first Arab-American refugee comedians to do so.
Amer has since performed in over 27 countries across five continents and was a part of the "Allah Made Me Funny" comedy tour with Preacher Moss and Azhar Usman starting in 2006. In 2004, he performed at The Comedy Festival in Las Vegas and has since appeared at various international festivals and events, including the Islamic Relief Evening of Inspiration at the Royal Albert Hall in 2007 and the Global Peace and Unity event in London in 2008.
Amer's comedy has been featured in sold-out shows worldwide, including venues such as Royal Albert Hall, Hammersmith Apollo, and Shrine Auditorium. He has also appeared on television and radio, including NPR, BBC, and CNN, and has been interviewed by major media outlets like The New York Times, Rolling Stone, and The Guardian. Amer was also featured on "Al-Bernameg with Bassem Youssef," the Egyptian equivalent of The Daily Show.
In 2015, Amer recorded his one-hour special, Legally Homeless, at the Warner Theatre, becoming one of the first Arab-Americans to have a nationally televised stand-up special. The special's title reflects Amer's experiences of navigating multiple cultures without a passport. Legally Homeless includes appearances by comedians such as Azhar Usman, Bassem Youssef, Hasan Minhaj, and Ramy Youssef.
Amer has co-written an original feature screenplay with filmmaker Iman Zawahry and Azhar Usman. He began touring with Dave Chappelle in 2015 and made his U.S. network television debut on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert in March 2017.
In 2018, Amer joined the cast of the Hulu show Ramy, playing Ramy's cousin Mo, who owns a diner where many of the show's characters gather. He also filmed his first Netflix comedy special, Mo Amer: The Vagabond, which was released in 2018.
In 2022, Amer created and starred in the Netflix series Mo, loosely based on his experiences as a Palestinian refugee. The show has received several awards, including a Peabody Award, and was renewed for a second season, which was released in January 2025. Amer also starred in the DC film Black Adam alongside Dwayne Johnson and was named Man of the Year by GQ in the UAE in 2022 .


== Comedy style ==
Amer draws from his ethnic and family background to discuss issues related to religion, terrorism, and contemporary politics, using personal stories about his family and himself. He often addresses his Palestinian heritage, family experiences, and growing up in America.


== Personal life ==
Amer lived in Los Angeles with his wife and step-daughter.
In 2009, Amer became a U.S. citizen, allowing him to travel to Palestine to visit family he had not seen for almost 20 years. He also returned to Kuwait and Baghdad for the first time since his family fled.
In October 2023, Amer signed an open letter for the "Artists4Ceasefire" campaign, along with other artists, urging President Joe Biden to advocate for a ceasefire during the 2023 Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
Palestinian Americans
Palestinian diaspora
List of American Muslims


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Mohammed Amer at IMDb