Adam Patrick DeVine (born November 7, 1983) is an American comedian, actor, producer and screenwriter. He is one of the stars and co-creators of the Comedy Central comedy television series Workaholics and Adam DeVine's House Party.
He played the role of Bumper in the musical films Pitch Perfect and Pitch Perfect 2 and the television series Pitch Perfect: Bumper in Berlin. He had recurring sitcom roles as Andy Bailey in Modern Family and Adam DeMamp in Workaholics. Since 2019, he has starred as Kelvin Gemstone in the acclaimed HBO comedy series The Righteous Gemstones. He had roles in the films The Intern; The Final Girls; Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates; Game Over, Man!; and When We First Met. He has voiced characters in films including Ice Age: Collision Course, The Lego Batman Movie, Extinct, Fixed and Hypergalactic, as well as in the animated series Uncle Grandpa, Penn Zero: Part-Time Hero, Vampirina, Green Eggs and Ham, and Captain Fall.


== Early life ==
Devine was born in Waterloo, Iowa, the son of Dennis and Penny Devine. He was raised in Omaha, Nebraska, and graduated from Millard South High School in 2002. He attended Orange Coast College; his friend and future co-star Blake Anderson was a classmate there.
In June 1995, when Devine was 11, he walked his bicycle across a road in Omaha. After he waited for three cement trucks to pass, a fourth truck, which he had not seen due to traffic traveling in the opposite direction, struck him while he was in the street. The first two wheels of the 42-ton truck rolled over him and he slid 500 ft (150 m). He was knocked unconscious, suffered acute shock, and fell into a coma. He was rushed to intensive care, where he woke up two weeks later. He had broken all the bones in both of his legs, severely crushed his legs below the knee, ripped the skin off from his legs, had a collapsed lung, several broken ribs, and developed multiple infections, and it was unknown whether he would walk again. Over several years, he had 26 surgeries and spent much of his time in a wheelchair. 
Due to the extent of his injuries, Devine was at a high risk of having to have his legs amputated, and having multiple organ failure. It was discovered that the reason he was not killed was that his bicycle took the full force of the truck. Devine regained full mobility but still has extensive scarring on his legs. He said, "It was really tough because I had to relearn how to walk, stand up, sit up and everything. The legs were totally mangled. I think that experience helped me realize that anything is possible." Passing the time he would call in to his local radio station and impersonate celebrities to entertain himself and others. After returning to school, he experienced bullying, but told jokes as a way to deflect attention away from his injuries. He later said that his experiences had contributed to how he saw comedy as a way of bringing people together.


== Career ==
Devine moved to Los Angeles where he began working as a stand-up comedian and actor. In 2006, Devine and friends Blake Anderson, Anders Holm, and Kyle Newacheck formed the sketch-comedy group Mail Order Comedy. They toured together live and found greater success on websites such as MySpace and YouTube. In April 2008, the G4 series Attack of the Show! featured "Wizards Never Die", a music video by Mail Order Comedy (as The Wizards). Purple Magic, a music album by The Wizards containing 14 tracks, was released on April 1, 2009. Comedy Central's original series Workaholics premiered on April 6, 2011, and stars Devine, Anderson, and Holm and co-stars Newacheck, all of whom serve as series creators and executive producers.
Devine had small roles in Mama's Boy (2007) and National Lampoon's 301: The Legend of Awesomest Maximus (2009). He had a recurring role on the television series Samantha Who?. He appeared on an episode of the Fox show Traffic Light (2011). In season 4 of Community (2013), he played a small role as William Winger, Jr., Jeff's half-brother. In the first episode of Arrested Development's fourth season, he played an airport ticket attendant alongside his Workaholics co-stars. He co-starred as Bumper Allen in the 2012 musical comedy film Pitch Perfect. For the performance, he won a Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Villain and earned one nomination for Choice Movie Breakout. He reprised the role of Bumper in the film's sequel Pitch Perfect 2 (2015).
Devine has appeared in the SimCity video game trailers as The Mayor. Devine is the voice artist for the character Pizza Steve in the Cartoon Network animated series Uncle Grandpa, which premiered on September 2, 2013. He starred in his own Comedy Central series, Adam Devine's House Party, which debuted in October 2013 and ended in May 2016 after 3 seasons. He appeared in a recurring role of the Pritchett family's new nanny, Andy, in seasons 5, 6, and 7 of the ABC network sitcom Modern Family. In 2015, he performed in a supporting role, playing Kurt, in the slasher film The Final Girls. In 2016, he starred alongside Zac Efron, playing brothers, in the comedy film Mike and Dave Need Wedding Dates. Devine made a cameo appearance in the video for the 2016 Blink-182 song "She's Out of Her Mind".
In 2016, Devine was cast as the lead of Walt Disney Pictures family-film Magic Camp, alongside Jeffrey Tambor and Gillian Jacobs. Devine plays Andy Duckerman, a failed magician who goes back to the camp of his youth to mentor a rag-tag bunch of magicians. Principal photography began in January 2017 around Los Angeles. The film was released on August 14, 2020.
In 2018, Devine played the lead, Noah Ashby, in the romantic comedy When We First Met, which he co-wrote. That same year, Devine, Anderson, and Holm starred in the film Game Over, Man!, with Newacheck directing and Newacheck and Seth Rogen among its producers. On August 18, 2019, Devine debuted as Kelvin Gemstone in the HBO comedy television series The Righteous Gemstones. Created by Danny McBride, the series follows a dysfunctional world-famous family of televangelists. In September 2019, HBO renewed the series for a second season.
In 2019, Devine starred alongside Rebel Wilson and Liam Hemsworth in the romantic comedy/parody Isn't It Romantic. The film marked the fourth time that Devine and Wilson have played love interests, after Workaholics, Pitch Perfect and Pitch Perfect 2.
It was announced on July 13, 2019, at San Diego Comic-Con that Devine and Anderson would executive produce and provide voices for the animated adaptation of Gilbert Shelton's underground comic book The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers.


== Personal life ==
Devine is a supporter of Children's Miracle Network Hospitals, a not-for-profit organization that raises funds for children's hospitals across the U.S. As he was treated by a children's hospital as a child, he attends charity events and visits the children, telling his story of survival to provide comfort to the patients and their parents.
Devine regularly takes part in United Service Organizations tours, providing entertainment for military personnel across the world and describes it as "the most rewarding experience of his life". 
In February 2023, Devine was celebrity monarch of the Krewe of Bacchus, a Carnival superkrewe in New Orleans' Mardi Gras. 
After meeting on the set of The Final Girls in 2014, Devine began dating Chloe Bridges in February 2015. On October 24, 2019, Devine revealed via Instagram that he and Bridges were engaged after four years of dating. The couple married on October 9, 2021.
On October 2, 2023, the couple announced on Instagram that they are expecting their first child. Their son Beau Devine was born on February 16, 2024.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music videos ===


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Adam DeVine at Wikimedia Commons
Adam DeVine at IMDb