Eunos MRT station is an elevated Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) station on the East–West line in Geylang, Singapore. Operated by SMRT Trains, the station primarily serves the Eunos subzone of Geylang as well as the Eunos Bus Interchange.
Plans for the station were first outlined in May 1982, and its construction was announced in October 1983 as part of Phase II of the MRT system. The contract for the station was awarded to a joint venture between Okumura Corporation and Oh Teck Thye. During construction, the joint venture was terminated when Oh Teck Thye was put under receivership, with Okumura taking over the project. The station opened on 4 November 1989. Platform screen doors were introduced in 2011, along with high volume low speed fans in 2013.
The design of the station's roof took inspiration from traditional Minangkabau architecture. Additionally, there are two murals created by local artist Erica Wee as a part of SMRT's heritage-themed Comic Connect public art display. The murals showcase the history of Eunos and Katong/Joo Chiat.


== History ==
Eunos station was first announced in May 1982 in the initial MRT plans. It was announced in October 1983 that the station would be part of Phase II of the MRT system.
There were several joint ventures between companies that prequalified for Contract 303 by May 1985, which initially detailed the construction of Paya Lebar station as well as a viaduct from Paya Lebar to Eunos stations. Ultimately, the contract was awarded to a Japanese–Singaporean joint venture between Okumura Corporation and Oh Teck Thye for S$60 million (1985) (US$27.27 million) in December 1985. Okumura had a 60% interest in the contract whilst Oh Teck Thye had 40%. By then, the contract expanded to include the construction of Eunos station as well as viaducts to Kembangan station. Work began in the same month. On 30 December 1986, the joint venture between the two companies was terminated, with Okumura Corporation undertaking all the responsibilities of Contract 303. It was later found out that Oh Teck Thye owed S$3 million (1987) (US$1.42 million) to the United Overseas Bank (UOB) and was placed under receivership when it failed to repay its debts. Meanwhile, Okumura requested permission to take over Oh Teck Thye's part of the contract. The Business Times described it as "the first case of a joint-venture split in the MRT Project". By February 1986, 41% of the contract had been completed. That July, Swiss–Singaporean company VSL Systems Pte Ltd won the subcontract for the supply of post-tensioned cables and pre-cast beams for the station's viaducts. The station opened on 4 November 1989 as part of a stretch between Marina Bay and Tanah Merah stations.
After the station's opening, its stairs had several design problems. In February 1996, a flight of stairs from the station's terrace to the ground underwent repairs after it had sunk into the ground. The difference between the concrete of the terrace and the soft soil of the ground resulted in a 40-centimetre (16 in) drop, which posed a risk for elderly riders and young children. A similar issue arose in August 2006 along with another stair-related issue. According to a letter published in TODAY by a commuter, the "granite-clad steps of grandiose design" at the station's south front exit "[led] to nowhere". The other flight of stairs was a set of steps connected to a ramp near Eunos Food Centre in the east side of the station, which was criticised for appearing to be wheelchair accessible when it was not. SMRT Trains clarified that the first set of stairs was meant to connect a carpark to the station, whilst the ramp was originally not meant for wheelchair users. It added that works were underway to fix the first set of stairs, which was uneven due to sinking into the ground, and to remove the ramp's stairs to make it wheelchair-accessible.
On 6 December 2000 at 8:15 am, a man fell on the eastbound track just as a train was entering the station. The driver did activate the train's emergency brakes but could not avoid hitting the man. This resulted in the man, who was still breathing, to become trapped between two cabins. He was rescued by the Singapore Civil Defence Force, who transported him to Changi General Hospital where he died an hour later.
As with most of the elevated stations along the East–West line, the station was initially built without platform screen doors. Following an increase in track intrusions and commuters slipping when rushing for the train, the Land Transport Authority and SMRT decided to install platform screen doors. After several successful tests at Jurong East, Yishun and Pasir Ris, They were eventually installed at Eunos station and commenced operations by March 2012. The station was retrofitted with high-volume low-speed fans by the first quarter of 2013. Noise barriers were installed on the viaducts from Eunos Road 2 to Eunos Road 5 by CCK Thomas Pte Ltd as part of a S$17 million (2015) (US$12.37 million) contract awarded in January 2015 to reduce sounds generated by trains. The installation was completed in 2018.


== Details ==
Eunos station is on the EWL with the station code EW7, situated between Kembangan and Paya Lebar stations. When it opened, it had the station code of E6. The station received its current station code in August 2001 as part of a system-wide campaign to cater to the expanding MRT system. As part of the EWL, it is operated by SMRT Trains. The station's name comes its location in the Eunos subzone of Geylang, which is in turn named after Malay community leader Mohamed Eunos bin Abdullah.
The station runs alongside Sims Avenue and is next to Eunos Crescent and Jalan Eunos as well as above a carpark. It has three exits primarily serving the Eunos area and Eunos Bus Interchange. Other landmarks include the Masjid Darul Aman, Eunos Crescent Market and Food Centre, Mangala Vihara Buddhist Temple, and the Kampong Ubi Police Post.
Like many stations on the initial MRT network, Eunos has an island platform and is elevated. The station also has a traditional Malay Minangkabau-style roof, which was part of SMRT's idea to give the Phase II stations "an ethnic touch". Specifically, designer of the station Scott Danielson of Parsons Brinckerhoff said that "the more [he travelled], the more disturbed [he became by] architects failing to reflect their own culture". The Minangkabau roof was initially meant for Khatib station, and then Sembawang station, before going to Eunos station due to its location in a Malay neighbourhood.

As a part of SMRT's heritage-themed Comic Connect public art display, there are two murals created by local artist Erica Wee. The first mural depicts the history of Katong and Joo Chiat, as well as businessman Chew Joo Chiat (the namesake of Joo Chiat), Zubir Said (the composer of Singapore's national anthem "Majulah Singapura"), and Old Palace Theatre. The second mural depicts the history of Eunos, including Mohamed Eunos bin Abdullah, the Telok Kurau English school, and Geylang Serai Village. According to 8World News, the mural took eight months to complete, including the design concept. Wee, who had returned to Singapore after 15 years of working in Kuala Lumpur, commented that the murals were "the best homecoming gift" as it contains elements when she was growing up.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Eunos MRT Station at Wikimedia Commons
Official website