"Family Matters" is a diss track written and recorded by Canadian rapper Drake. It was released on May 3, 2024 through OVO Sound and Republic Records, amid his feud with Kendrick Lamar alongside an accompanying music video. It is Drake's third installment in his series of diss tracks directed at Lamar. The track is a response to several songs (Lamar's "Euphoria" and "6:16 in LA"; Rick Ross' "Champagne Moments"; Future, Metro Boomin and the Weeknd's "All to Myself"; Future, Metro Boomin and A$AP Rocky's "Show of Hands").
Produced by Boi-1da, Tay Keith, Dramakid, Mark Ronson, Kevin Mitchell and Fierce, "Family Matters" is a trap song, with a portion of the song having drill production. The track is divided into three separate sections, with lyrics targeting several rappers including Lamar, Future, Rick Ross, A$AP Rocky, Kanye West, producers Metro Boomin and Pharrell Williams, and singer the Weeknd. Music critics noted that the content of the song marked an intensification of the feud between Drake and Lamar, with lyrics alleging Lamar engaged in domestic abuse against his wife, cheated on his wife with white women, and that one of Lamar's children is actually fathered by Dave Free.
"Family Matters" received positive reviews from critics, with praise for its lyricism, production, and easter eggs in the music video. The song debuted at number seven on the US Billboard Hot 100 on the chart published May 13, 2024. With the entrance, Drake adds his record-padding 78th Hot 100 top 10, and “Family Matters” is also his record-extending 331st entry on the chart overall. Lamar responded to "Family Matters" within an hour, releasing "Meet the Grahams".


== Background and release ==

Drake and Kendrick Lamar have been involved in a rap feud since the early 2010s. The feud escalated after the release of "Like That" by Future, Metro Boomin, and Lamar on March 22, 2024. Drake then released the songs "Push Ups" and "Taylor Made Freestyle" in April. "Taylor Made Freestyle" was later deleted from social media after Tupac Shakur's estate threatened Drake with legal action for the use of AI-generated vocals resembling Shakur's. In response, Lamar released "Euphoria" on April 30 and "6:16 in LA" on May 3.
Drake posted a parody of "Buried Alive Interlude", a song recorded by Lamar for Drake's Take Care (2011), on Instagram on the same day. In the parody, Drake mocks Lamar's performance on the original song and disses him, claiming Lamar is jealous of his success. "Family Matters" was released later that day with an accompanying music video.


== Music and lyrics ==

The song opens with a voice clip from Drake's mother, Sandi, who advises, "Maybe in this song, you shouldn't start by saying," to which Drake replies, "Nigga, I said it, I know that you mad," referencing the final lines from Kendrick Lamar's song "Euphoria.", in which he says "We don't wanna hear you say 'nigga' no more." Following this, Drake delivers a series of allegations against Lamar, including accusations of domestic abuse, infidelity involving white women, and a claim that one of Lamar's children was fathered by his business partner, Dave Free. Drake also suggests that Lamar attempted to have the AI-generated Tupac Shakur vocals from "Taylor Made Freestyle" removed by contacting Shakur's estate. In the first verse he also mentions YG, The Game and Chris Brown as people "who really bang a set".
In the second part of the track, Drake broadens his critiques to include other prominent figures in the music industry, such as Future, Rick Ross, A$AP Rocky, Kanye West, producers Metro Boomin and Pharrell Williams, and singer The Weeknd. Additionally, Drake accuses Rick Ross of using the weight-loss drug Ozempic and repeatedly mentions Ross's past as a police officer. Drake references A$AP Rocky, criticizing both his music and fashion career, as well as his relationship with Rihanna. Regarding Future, Drake expresses reluctance to engage in conflict with him, while also accusing Metro Boomin of being a negative influence.


== Music video ==
The music video is laden with disses to Lamar: Drake was viewed as paying homage to 50 Cent by featuring a vintage G-Unit spinner chain and wears FUBU, with critics noting it as serving as a direct response to Lamar's mention of the brand in "Euphoria". The video also features a third generation Plymouth Grand Voyager, a rebadged version of the Chrysler Town & Country (as both vans are of the same generation & are variants of the Chrysler NS Minivan Platform) featured on the cover of the deluxe edition of Good Kid, M.A.A.D City (2012), being crushed in a junkyard.
References to Lamar's relationship to Alford, with cakes inscribed with "Happy Divorce" and "Happy Co-parenting", also feature, alongside a ringed chain: according to Jordan Rose at Complex, fans speculated the ringed chain was similar to the one Lamar gave Alford in 2015, while the presence of a Michael Jackson action figure representing Jackson's song "Black or White" referencing Drake's claims that Lamar cheated on Alford with white women. Drake also flaunts jewelry and memorabilia previously owned or designed by Pharrell Williams, and a ring owned by Tupac Shakur, the video also shows Drake visiting New Ho King.


== Responses ==
Lamar responded with "Meet the Grahams" on the same day as "Family Matters". ASAP Rocky responded with the song "Ruby Rosary" featuring J. Cole, released on September 6, 2024.


== Charts ==


== References ==