"Not Like Us" is a diss track written and recorded by the American rapper Kendrick Lamar amidst his highly publicized feud with Canadian rapper Drake. It broke multiple records on the streaming platform Spotify, was Lamar's fourth number-one song on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and is one of the most awarded songs in Grammy Awards history. With widespread acclaim from music critics and fans who feel it solidified Lamar's victory in the conflict, many regard it as the best diss track in the feud and one of the greatest diss tracks in history.
Released on May 4, 2024, through Interscope Records, "Not Like Us" was Lamar's fifth installment in his series of diss tracks directed at Drake, premiering less than 20 hours after his previous single "Meet the Grahams". Primarily produced by Mustard, with additional work from Sounwave and Sean Momberger, "Not Like Us" is a hyphy-influenced West Coast hip hop song composed of a prominent bassline with lively strings and finger snaps. Lyrically, it continues the themes first introduced in "Meet the Grahams" by doubling down on allegations of Drake's pedophilia and sexual misconduct, while also criticizing his cultural identity and relationships with artists based in Atlanta, Georgia.
"Not Like Us" is the longest-running number-one song on the Hot Rap Songs and Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs charts, while peaking in the top 20 in Australia, Canada, and several European countries. Lamar first performed "Not Like Us" during The Pop Out: Ken & Friends, where he played the track five consecutive times. He would perform the song again when he headlined the Super Bowl LIX halftime show. An accompanying music video, directed by Dave Free and Lamar, was released on American Independence Day. "Not Like Us" swept all five of its Grammy nominations at the 67th ceremony: Record of the Year, Song of the Year, Best Rap Performance, Best Rap Song, and Best Music Video.


== Background and release ==

American rapper Kendrick Lamar and Canadian rapper Drake have been engaged in a rap feud since August 2013. Tensions escalated in March 2024, following Lamar's surprise appearance on Future and Metro Boomin's single "Like That", which was perceived as a diss aimed at Drake and J. Cole over their track "First Person Shooter". Drake responded to Lamar's verse with the single "Push Ups" and the since-removed song "Taylor Made Freestyle". Lamar fired back with the songs "Euphoria" and "6:16 in LA".
Hours after "6:16 in LA" was released, Drake responded with the single "Family Matters", in which he accused Lamar of abusing his romantic partner Whitney Alford and alleged that one of his two children was fathered by his creative partner, Dave Free. Less than an hour later, Lamar responded with "Meet the Grahams", which described Drake as an alleged sexual predator who runs a sex trafficking ring inside of his Toronto mansion, known as the Embassy, while fathering a secret daughter. "Not Like Us" was unexpectedly released on May 4, 2024, less than 24 hours after "Meet the Grahams" was published. The only prior marketing that the song received came from Anthony "Top Dawg" Tiffith, the head of Lamar's former record label Top Dawg Entertainment, who posted, "Dot, I see dead people" on Twitter approximately two hours before its premiere. The single's cover art shows a bird's-eye-view of Drake's Toronto mansion from a Google Maps screenshot with 13 red markers placed on its roof, symbolizing the presence of registered sex offenders.
Like Lamar's previous releases during the feud, "Not Like Us" was initially released as a YouTube exclusive before Interscope Records serviced it to music streaming platforms several hours later. He reportedly removed the copyright claims for a limited time, effectively allowing the public to freely use the song even for commercial purposes. Universal Music promoted the song on radio airplay in Italy on May 10, 2024. A blended version of the studio recording with the live performance from the Pop Out: Ken & Friends impacted radio stations in California on July 11, 2024.


== Music and lyrics meanings ==

"Not Like Us" is a "club-friendly" West Coast hip hop track with strong hyphy stylings. Several elements of its production, including the "stirring" violins, piano and brass instruments, were taken from samples of Monk Higgins's 1968 rendition of "I Believe to My Soul", a cover of Ray Charles's 1961 composition. Despite speculation, the song does not include a sample of Nas's diss record "Ether" (2001). On "Not Like Us", Lamar employs a "comically exaggerated" cadence that elicited comparisons to Drakeo the Ruler's signature flow.

Mustard, the song's primary producer, wanted to work with Lamar for years and would send him about five beats a day for three months. He was inspired to compose the beat after imagining what Dr. Dre would create if he was in a recording studio with Lil Jon. With contributions from Sounwave and Sean Momberger, Mustard produced "Not Like Us" in about 30 minutes by speeding up the sample's tempo to create a "relentless" and "urgent" atmosphere. Its additional bassline, snare drums, and finger snaps heightened its "aggressive" tone. On April 6, 2024, Mustard sent the finished production to Lamar while attending his manager's birthday dinner. He received a complimentary text message from Lamar later that evening. Mustard did not know that his work would anchor the song until it was released to the public.
The lyrics to "Not Like Us" were written solely by Lamar. It begins with him whispering "psst, I see dead people", a reference to The Sixth Sense (1999); he previously referenced the film on "Euphoria". Using various metaphors and allusions to his native Southern California, Lamar then dives into a barrage of attacks targeting Drake's alleged inappropriate sexual behavior with minors. His personal incidents with J. Cole, Lil Wayne and tennis player Serena Williams are also touched on. Lamar uses Drake's album Certified Lover Boy (2021) to label him and his OVO crew as "certified pedophiles". Specific targets were aimed at Chubbs, his head of security; PartyNextDoor, the first artist he signed; and Baka Not Nice, who was charged with six human trafficking offenses in 2014.
Lamar also takes several opportunities to challenge Drake's cultural identity. The chorus of "Not Like Us" has alluded to him stating that "rap practitioners" such as Drake are unlike his caliber, "one that organically abides by the given morals of Black culture". Lamar further suggests that Drake's portrayal of Blackness likens him to Brad "B-Rad G" Gluckman from the film Malibu's Most Wanted (2003). In the third verse, Lamar flips Drake's comment about how he raps like he is about to "get the slaves freed" in "Family Matters" to not only claim that he misused the term "slave", but to also accuse him of exploiting Black artists from Atlanta for street credibility and financial gain. He uses his previous collaborations with Future, Lil Baby, 21 Savage, Young Thug, Quavo and 2 Chainz as examples of him forming "calculated strategies" over "authentic connections".


== Critical reception and analysis ==
"Not Like Us" was met with widespread critical acclaim for its contagious production, Lamar's vocal performance, and scathing songwriting. GQ's Frazier Tharpe dubbed the track a leading contender for the "song of the summer". He praised how the "banger" summoned Mustard's "raucous, party-starting homegrown energy" to deliver Lamar's "haymaker" that both out-strategized Drake and celebrated their West Coast upbringings. Stereogum editors found the song to be not only an "ultra-effective" diss record but a hit filled with "vicious" allegations and history lessons. Professional wrestler Shawn Michaels appreciated that his Sweet Chin Music finisher was mentioned in the song and invited Lamar and Drake to settle their differences at a WWE NXT program. Two other individuals referenced in the song, Serena Williams and M. Night Shyamalan, the writer and director of The Sixth Sense, praised it. Harvey Mason Jr., chief executive officer of the Recording Academy, praised the song's artistry and relevance.
Journalists described "Not Like Us" as a cultural touchstone, a clarion call for the West Coast, and one of the biggest diss tracks they have witnessed in their lifetimes. They considered the timing of its release and content an effective strategy in capturing the zeitgeist before listeners grew tired of the feud. Jordan Rose of Complex declared "Not Like Us" as the best track released during Lamar and Drake's feud due to its electric tone and "contagious" production, although much of the lyrics are "very questionable". Rose believes that "time will tell" if the song marked the "end conclusion" of their war, but it has already proven itself to be "the stone that stunned Goliath." Vibe's Armon Sadler ranked "Not Like Us" as the second-best track of the feud, praising the "undeniable bop" as a "masterclass" in execution. Mark Elibert from Billboard, who named it the fourth-best song, shared similar sentiments. Canadian outlets such as CBC News and Exclaim! opined that "Not Like Us" has grown into an anti-Canadian anthem reminiscent of "Blame Canada" from South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut (1999). Uproxx's Wongo Okon noted it helped Lamar become a more appealing figure for Generation Z and Generation Alpha listeners.
The song has also been examined in the context of race and cultural appropriation. Salamishah Tillet of The New York Times opined that while the message of "Not Like Us" may seem to attack Drake's biracial identity, its popularity has inspired a broad assortment of interracial interpretations. Rolling Stone's Andre Gee believes the song is a "rally against perpetrators who shifted hip-hop from a Black and brown community with culturally understood modes of being into an at-times parodic circus." The Triibe's Mark P. Braboy expanded on Gee's sentiments by applying the song's message to "culture vultures" in hip hop journalism who have built their platforms off of their exploitation of Black trauma.
Pitchfork named "Not Like Us" as the third-best song released in the 2020s so far. In his accompanying excerpt, Alphonse Pierre declared the line "Certified Lover Boy? Certified pedophiles" as the "defining" lyric of the decade, in ways that are "unsettling and amazing and troubling and funny." Other publications such as Complex, HipHopDX, The Ringer, and The Root ranked "Not Like Us" as one of the greatest diss tracks of all time.


== Commercial performance ==
"Not Like Us" led the Billboard Global 200 chart for two non-consecutive weeks, marking Lamar's first solo number-one song on the survey. It also marked his eighth top-ten song on the UK Singles Chart, where it debuted at number ten and later peaked at number six. "Not Like Us" was an immediate commercial success and broke numerous streaming records—most of which were previously held by Drake. It is reportedly the most-streamed diss track on Spotify, earning the biggest single-day streams for a hip hop song (12.8 million) and the most song streams in a week by a rapper (81.2 million). Additionally, it became the fastest rap song on the platform to accumulate 100 million (9 days), 200 million (19 days), 300 million (35 days), 400 million (54 days), 500 million (70 days), 600 million (87 days), and 700 million streams (112 days). It accumulated one billion streams in mid-January 2025.
In the United States, "Not Like Us" debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart dated May 18, 2024, opening with 70.9 million streams, five million radio airplay audience impressions, and 15,000 copies sold. It registered the highest first-week streaming figure for a hip hop song since Billboard removed YouTube song user-generated content from its chart metrics in 2020. As Lamar's fourth number-one single and first solo number-one debut, "Not Like Us" became the first rap song in history to top the Hot 100 with a shortened tracking week of five days. It also marked Mustard's first number-one single and debut as a producer, and one of the only chart leaders to be penned by a sole writer. 
Following its music video premiere, "Not Like Us" bested "A Bar Song (Tipsy)" by Shaboozey and returned to number one on the Hot 100 chart, dated July 20, 2024, with 53.8 million streams, 40 million radio airplay audience impressions, and 8,000 copies sold. It is the longest-running solo chart-topper of Lamar's career, surpassing "Humble". In October 2024, "Not Like Us" broke the record set by "Old Town Road" by Lil Nas X featuring Billy Ray Cyrus for the most weeks spent atop the Hot Rap Songs chart. It also holds the record for the longest-charting number-one song on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart with "Kill Bill" by SZA. By the end of the year, "Not Like Us", accumulated 823.5 million on-demand audio streams in the US, making it the second most streamed song of the year and was the sixth best-performing song on the Billboard Hot 100 in 2024.
In New Zealand, "Not Like Us" debuted at number six on the Official Aotearoa Music Charts dated May 10, 2024. Two weeks later, it reached number two for one week before dropping out of the top three. Following its music video release, "Not Like Us" became Lamar's second number-one single as a solo artist, and his third overall in the country. It remained atop for another week.


== Accolades ==
On November 8, 2024, "Not Like Us" was nominated for the 67th Annual Grammy Awards in five different categories: Record of the Year, Song of the Year, Best Rap Performance, Best Rap Song, and Best Music Video. On February 3, 2025, the song swept all five categories. Though he did not mention Drake in his speeches, rather dedicating them to the city of Los Angeles, Lamar was noted for his choice of outfit at the ceremony – a denim top along with denim pants, known as a "Canadian tuxedo" – seen as a playful jab at the Canadian-born Drake.


== Music video ==


=== Production ===

Dave Free and Lamar directed and executive produced the music video for "Not Like Us". Charm La'Donna handled the choreography and is also credited as the associate producer. In commemoration of American Independence Day, the music video was released on July 4, 2024, at approximately 3 p.m. PT. Four still images from the video were leaked to social media a day prior. CNN and NME noted widespread anticipation for the video up to its release; Billboard called it "the most anticipated video of the year so far". By the morning after, the video had reached over 13 million views on YouTube, and by that afternoon, the number reached over 17 million.
The music video contains complex symbolism, innuendos, euphemisms, double entendres, and easter eggs; each ripened for fan interpretation. Parts of the visuals were filmed on June 22, 2024, across multiple locations in Lamar's hometown of Compton, California and Los Angeles. PGLang, Lamar and Free's production company, enlisted the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for increased security. Deputies monitoring the production, which over 1,000 fans witnessed, were reportedly paid $120 an hour. A number of celebrities made cameo appearances in the music video, including Jay Rock, Schoolboy Q, Ab-Soul, Anthony "Top Dawg" Tiffith, Terrence "Punch" Henderson, Anthony "Moosa" Tiffith Jr., Mustard, Dave Free, Tommy the Clown and the Hip Hop Clowns, Charm La'Donna, DeMar DeRozan, YG, Roddy Ricch, Steve Lacy, JasonMartin, Thundercat, Brandon T. Jackson, Hit-Boy and his father Big Hit, Storm DeBarge, Kida the Great, and Taiwan Williams, among others.


=== Synopsis ===
The video starts with a view of the Compton Courthouse overlooking the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial. Lamar sashays down a white, morgue-like hall to a snippet of the then-unreleased song "Squabble Up” from his sixth studio album GNX (2024). Upon knocking on a door, Tommy the Clown slides open an eye hole and asks for the password. Lamar whispers the code, "I see dead people", and is allowed entry, although he is scolded for being late. He takes his seat with his classmates, the Hip Hop Clowns, and grooves to "Not Like Us". Lamar gives the finger and dances in the corner. A classmate passes him a Bible, which he carefully slips in his jacket.
Using cinematography that mirrors the lyric video for "Family Matters", a covered figure resembling Drake on the cover of Dark Lane Demo Tapes (2020) tries to ambush Lamar from behind; he is quickly blown away. Lamar completes seventeen push-ups on four cinder blocks—a response to Drake ordering him to "drop and give me fifty" on "Push Ups"—in a bedroom with strong similarities to a prison cell. He then strikes an owl-shaped piñata and glides down a hopscotch court numbered 1 through 10. A disclaimer insulting Drake's record label, OVO Sound, is shown as he repeatedly hits the piñata. Aerial shots of a large crowd of Compton residents gathered inside of the memorial and chanting the song are featured throughout the video.
Lamar and Mustard take a drive through Compton's Rosecrans Avenue in a black Ferrari SF90 Stradale. They stop at Tam's Burgers #21 to grab some food with dancer Storm DeBarge. Lamar then joins a group of friends on a rooftop near the Courthouse before meeting Free and DeMar DeRozan at a dockyard containing white shipping containers. Dancers Kida the Great and Taiwan Williams accompany Lamar on the dockyard, while La'Donna is seen tightrope walking in the clouds. At Nickerson Gardens, Lamar hangs out with his former Top Dawg labelmates Jay Rock, Schoolboy Q and Ab-Soul (collectively known as Black Hippy), along with executives Anthony "Top Dawg" Tiffith, Terrence "Punch" Henderson, and Anthony "Moosa" Tiffith Jr.
Shifting back to the classroom, Lamar and the Hip Hop Clowns perform a number under Tommy the Clown's watch. Lamar poses with his partner Whitney Alford and their children in a living room; the couple dances joyfully while the children play. A barn owl and Lamar engage in a stare down—as he leaves, the owl realizes it has been locked in a cage. 
In what appears to be unedited footage from the shoot, Free asks the rapturous Compton crowd through a bullhorn if they want to play the song again as the end titles appear on the screen.


=== Reception and analysis ===
The music video was met with widespread critical acclaim. Numerous publications and websites called it another victory lap for Lamar in his feud with Drake. CBC News called it a moment of re-ignition of the feud, while Vibe opined it as Lamar's "knockout punch" against the rapper. The video's content also discredited many allegations and claims that Drake had dissed Lamar with, including refuting Drake's derogatory claims against his family with their appearance in the video dancing happily alongside him, as well as the video credits reading "Directed by Dave Free and Kendrick Lamar", which dispelled rumors that Lamar and his creative partner had been in conflict with each other.
Vinson Cunningham of The New Yorker thought that the video's Independence Day release was a "jingoistic move" that draws a "bright line" along the Canada–United States border. He made an "Edenic" comparison to the image of Lamar and his family posing with Grant Wood's American Gothic (1930) and Gordon Parks's 1942 photograph of the same name, arguing that the frame inaugurated a "new sort" of American iconography. Entertainment Weekly observed the inclusion of new music in the intro to the video, noting fan speculation that it was to be included in Lamar's potential next studio album. USA Today's Naledi Ushe mused that with the release of the music video, Lamar had aimed to take Drake's "song of the summer trophy", noting Drake's perceived achievement with several of his late 2010s singles and the relative failure of the singles from For All the Dogs (2023), leaving the title open for Lamar and Sabrina Carpenter with "Espresso" to contend. NBC News noted the song's appraisal as a celebration of Compton and the West Coast. GQ appreciated Lamar's choice of fashion style in the video, pointing out that his wearing of a Prada suit and multiple Martine Rose track jackets reinforced a claim that he made a year ago that he "is the best-dressed MC in rap".


== Drake's response ==
Drake responded with "The Heart Part 6" two days after "Not Like Us" was released. On November 24, 2024, Drake appeared on a Kick livestream with Canadian streamer xQc, describing himself as "fully intact, mind, body, and soul". Lamar reacted to these comments with amusement.


=== Legal actions ===
The next day, on November 25, 2024, Drake filed a petition against Universal Music Group (UMG) and Spotify under New York law claiming that they had conspired to artificially inflate the popularity of "Not Like Us" to "deceive consumers into believing the song was more popular than it was in reality". His attorneys accused UMG of violating the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) and using deceptive business practices and false advertising. UMG stated in response that the allegations were "offensive and untrue", that they would "never do anything to undermine" any artist signed to the label, and that "fans choose the music they want to hear". Drake later filed a second petition against UMG under Texas law claiming defamation by failing to halt the release of a song "falsely accusing him of being a sex offender." He also accused UMG of "funneling payments" to iHeartRadio as part of a "pay-to-play scheme" to promote "Not Like Us" on the radio. On January 15, 2025, Drake filed a lawsuit against UMG; the lawsuit is not about Kendrick Lamar and alleges that the company "publish[ed], promote[d], exploit[ed], and monetize[d] allegations (in "Not Like Us") that it understood were not only false, but dangerous".


== Notable live performances ==


=== The Pop Out: Ken & Friends ===

During the Pop Out: Ken & Friends, held on Juneteenth 2024 at the Kia Forum in Inglewood, California, Lamar performed "Not Like Us" for the first time. The song was introduced by Dr. Dre whispering the opening lines. The track was followed by four consecutive reprises, including two which featured a wide assortment of emerging and notable West Coast figures. NPR Music's Sheldon Pearce compared the picture to Art Kane's A Great Day in Harlem (1958). Several critics viewed the "raw" performances of "Not Like Us" as a highlight of the concert and praised its liveliness. David Dennis Jr. of Andscape commended the way Lamar turned a song centered on his disdain for Drake into a moment of "unity and love".


=== Super Bowl LIX halftime show ===

On September 8, 2024, Lamar was announced as the headlining act for the Super Bowl LIX halftime show at the Caesars Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana. Speculation arose as to whether he would incorporate "Not Like Us" into his performance. Justin Sayles of The Ringer called the halftime performance announcement as the capstone of a year that had seen Lamar "ascend to the highest levels" of popular culture, and seen Drake "sink to the lowest levels" of his career. 
"Not Like Us" would indeed be performed towards the end of Lamar's Super Bowl halftime setlist on February 9, 2025. In an interlude during the middle of the set, Lamar teased the song and alluded to Drake's litigation by quipping "I want to perform their favorite song, but you know they love to sue", which was followed by a brief audio clip of the song's introduction. In another interlude after performing "All the Stars", he said "they tried to rig the game but you can't fake influence", then launched into "Not Like Us". Lamar looked directly into the camera with a smile when he rapped "Say Drake, I hear you like 'em young". The lyric including the word "pedophile" would be censored on streaming services like Tubi, but the audience could be heard shouting the lyric "tryna strike a chord and it's probably A minor" along with him a few lines later. Lisa Respers France of CNN would call "Not Like Us" the star of the halftime performance, while Maria Sherman of the Associated Press described Lamar performing the song on the biggest stage in U.S. Sports, especially days after the song swept the Grammy Awards, as "another step in Lamar's continued victory lap".


== Cultural impact ==


=== Economy and fashion ===
Following the release of its music video, Tam's Burgers #21 saw a significant spike in business. Lauro Hernandez and his son Bryan Noe, the managers of the restaurant, reported that they experienced a 30% to 40% boost in sales. Spiro Vovos, who owns the Tam's Burgers chain, later clarified that it was more of a surge in foot traffic and content creators visiting the location; the sales influx mostly occurred as the video was being filmed. A mural honoring Lamar and "Not Like Us" was painted on the restaurant's exterior by Mike Norice. Fashion brands such as Willy Chavarria also enjoyed substantial increases in brand recognition and sales after their pieces were featured in the music video.
Small business owners in Compton, however, were negatively impacted by the production of its music video. In a report conducted by the Los Angeles Times, a strip mall across from the Compton Courthouse that houses local businesses had its parking lot overrun by "cars and chaos" as hundreds of people poured out to the Courthouse to catch a glimpse of Lamar. Its owners had to shut down operations and claimed they lost thousands of dollars during the shoot. They placed the blame on city officials for their lack of communication, and have asked Lamar, PGLang, or the city government to provide financial compensation.


=== Entertainment ===
Several musicians, such as Isaiah Rashad, Janet Jackson, Megan Thee Stallion, and T-Pain, have incorporated "Not Like Us" in their live performances; while others including DaBaby, Remble, Montana of 300, and Kevin Hart shared freestyles. At the 2024 BET Awards, host Taraji P. Henson parodied "Not Like Us" as part of her opening monologue. Serena Williams crip walked to the track while hosting the 2024 ESPY Awards. Richie Branson composed a chiptune version of the track and designed a free-to-play video game, titled Not Like Us: The Game. It attracted 1.2 million players during the first 36 hours of its release. Some iPhone users noticed that if they asked Siri to play Drake's Certified Lover Boy (2021) on Spotify, it would occasionally play "Not Like Us" instead.


=== Politics ===
"Not Like Us" was referenced a number of times during the 2024 US election cycle. Democratic figures including vice president Kamala Harris, representative Jasmine Crockett, mayor of Baltimore Brandon Scott, attorney general of Illinois Kwame Raoul, and a protest against Donald Trump in Chicago used the song's chorus as a political metaphor to criticize the president-elect and members of the Republican Party. Sports journalist Bomani Jones argued that the song influenced a shift in campaign messaging on "every side", suggesting a parallel with politicians like Tim Walz, the governor of Minnesota, publicly branding Trump, his running mate JD Vance, and other Republicans as "weird".
After incumbent president Joe Biden withdrew from the 2024 presidential election, Harris incorporated "Not Like Us" into her own presidential campaign with Walz as her running mate. Journalists were intrigued by the decision, as Harris's mixed-race ancestry was a subject of questioning by her opponents, while younger supporters such as Parker Short were energized by it. During the 2024 Democratic National Convention, "Not Like Us" was chosen as one of the four walk-on songs to represent California at the ceremonial roll call. It was referenced by Alabama congressional candidate Shomari Figures in the context of voting rights during his address at the convention. In global politics, rapper Sabi Wu sampled "Not Like Us" to compose a protest song opposing the Kenya Finance Bill.


=== Sports ===
Keith Murphy for Andscape predicted that "Not Like Us" could become the "next great sports anthem". Major professional sports leagues such as the National Basketball Association (NBA), the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball (MLB), Major League Soccer (MLS), and the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) have used "Not Like Us" in their broadcasts and social media campaigns, especially teams from the Los Angeles area. The social media accounts of the Argentina national football team used the song's title to mock Drake after he lost a $300,000 bet in favor of Canada during the semifinals of the 2024 Copa América. USA Basketball also used the track throughout the 2024 Summer Olympics. Marching bands representing historically black universities, such as the Human Jukebox (Southern), Marching 100 (Florida A&M), and Sounds of Dyn-O-Mite (Alcorn State), performed "Not Like Us" during their respective sports seasons. 


== Personnel ==
Credits are adapted from Tidal.

Kendrick Lamar – lead vocals, lyricist
Ray Charles – composer, sampling
Sean Momberger – composer, co-producer
Mustard – lead producer
Sounwave – co-producer
Jonathan Turner – mix engineer
Ray Charles Brown Jr. – recording engineer
Nicolas de Porcel – mastering engineer


== Charts ==


== Certifications ==


== Release history ==


== Notes ==


== References ==