The Brutalist is a 2024 epic period drama film directed and produced by Brady Corbet, who co-wrote the screenplay with Mona Fastvold. It stars Adrien Brody as a Hungarian-Jewish Holocaust survivor who immigrates to the United States, where he struggles to achieve the American Dream until a wealthy client changes his life. The cast also features Felicity Jones, Guy Pearce, Joe Alwyn, Raffey Cassidy, Stacy Martin, Emma Laird, Isaach de Bankolé, and Alessandro Nivola.
A co-production between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Hungary, The Brutalist premiered at the 81st Venice International Film Festival on September 1, 2024, where Corbet was awarded the Silver Lion for Best Direction. It was released in the United States by A24 on December 20, 2024; in Hungary by UIP-DunaFilm on January 23, 2025; and in the United Kingdom by Focus Features through Universal International Distribution on January 24, 2025.
The film received critical acclaim for its direction, screenplay, performances, cinematography, and score. Several critics viewed it as a return to form for resurrecting the intermission and VistaVision, the latter of which was mostly used until the 1960s. The film earned 10 nominations at the 97th Academy Awards (including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor for Brody, Best Supporting Actress for Jones, and Best Supporting Actor for Pearce), and at the 82nd Golden Globe Awards won three awards including Best Motion Picture – Drama. It was named one of the top ten films of 2024 by the American Film Institute. It has grossed $25 million against a $9.6 million budget.


== Plot ==


=== Overture ===
Hungarian-Jewish Holocaust survivor László Tóth, forcibly separated from his wife and orphaned niece after being sent to the Buchenwald concentration camp, immigrates to the United States. As his ship enters New York Harbor, he spies the Statue of Liberty, although from his vantage point it appears to be askew and nearly upside down (an image reprinted on the film's poster and in the opening titles). A Bauhaus-trained architect, László travels by bus to Philadelphia, where he stays with his cousin, Attila, and Attila's Catholic wife, Audrey, while he looks for work. Attila reveals to a relieved László that his wife Erzsébet and niece Zsófia are still alive, but stuck in Europe due to Erzsébet's weak health.


=== Part 1: The Enigma of Arrival ===
In 1947, Attila offers László work with his furniture business. However, he is relegated to a makeshift bedroom in the showroom's storage closet, and uses a service bathroom around back of the building. He also discovers that Attila has shed his Jewish background and assimilated into American culture. They are soon commissioned to renovate the library of the Bucks County mansion of wealthy industrialist Harrison Lee Van Buren at the behest of his son Harry while his father is away. Following a drunken night of merriment, Audrey conveys her disdain for László and suggests he lives elsewhere. Back at the mansion, Harrison arrives home early, is enraged at the surprise renovation, and fires the men; Harry does not pay them their fee. Attila demands that László leave their home, blaming him for the failed project and falsely accuses him of accosting his wife (implying she lied to ensure his eviction). Three years later, László, now a heroin addict, works as a laborer loading coal and lives in charity housing with Gordon, an African-American single father László befriended soon after immigrating while on a queue at a soup kitchen. Harrison turns up to tell him the architectural community has lauded his modern library renovation, and that he has researched his past and discovered that László was an accomplished architect in Europe.
Harrison then pays the money he owes László — which he and Gordon then spend on heroin — and invites László to a party in his honor, where he commissions him to construct a grand project in tribute to Harrison's late mother: a community center comprising a library, theater, gymnasium, and a chapel. Work begins immediately with László living and working on site and employing Gordon — both of them now functioning heroin addicts. Harrison introduces László to his personal lawyer, who expedites the immigration of László's wife and niece.


=== Part 2: The Hard Core of Beauty ===
In 1953, László greets Erzsébet and Zsófia and discovers that due to their suffering in wartime, Erzsébet is confined to a wheelchair from osteoporosis caused by famine, and Zsófia is unable to speak. During construction, László clashes with contractors and consultants hired by Harrison who depart from his design, and Harry derides László as being merely "tolerated" and makes lewd remarks about Zsófia. László warns Zsófia to avoid Harry who, it is implied, has assaulted her. Following the derailment of a train carrying materials and ensuing legal costs, a furious Harrison abandons the project and fires the workers.
In 1958, László and Erzsébet have moved to New York City, where he works as a drafter at an architecture firm, and she is a writer. Zsófia, who recovered her ability to speak, is expecting a child with her husband, Binyamin. They announce they are making Aliyah and moving to Jerusalem. Harrison restarts the project, and László resumes construction.
While in the mines of Carrara to purchase marble, Harrison rapes an intoxicated László, calling him a societal leech whose people invite their own persecution. Back on site, an increasingly traumatized László begins to unravel, becoming more belligerent, impulsively firing Gordon during an argument. He laments to Erzsébet that they are not welcome in America (referencing Harry's and Audrey's prior contempt). After László almost kills Erzsébet by giving her heroin to soothe the pain from her osteoporosis when she runs out of medication, she proposes they live in Jerusalem with Zsófia and her family, to which he agrees. Shortly afterwards, Erzsébet, now using a walker instead of a wheelchair, visits Harrison at his home and calls him a rapist in front of his family and associates. An enraged Harry violently pushes her out, before Maggie intervenes and helps her to her taxi. Unable to find his father, Harry organizes a search party to find him leading towards the community center, albeit with his fate ultimately left unclear. The scene concludes with a view of the illuminated cross upside down, which parallels the shot of the Statue of Liberty at the beginning of the film.


=== Epilogue: The First Architecture Biennale ===
In 1980, Erzsébet has died, and a retrospective of László's work is held in Venice. The exhibition includes the community center, finally completed after a decade's hiatus. Zsófia, accompanied by her young adult daughter and an aging László, gives a speech highlighting how László designed the Van Buren Community Center to resemble the concentration camps that imprisoned the Tóths, and functions as a way of processing trauma. She ends by claiming that László once told her: "No matter what the others try and sell you, it is the destination, not the journey.”


== Cast ==
Adrien Brody as László Tóth, a Hungarian-Jewish architect and Holocaust survivor of the Buchenwald concentration camp who immigrates to America
Felicity Jones as Erzsébet Tóth, László's wife, a journalist and Holocaust survivor of the Dachau concentration camp
Guy Pearce as Harrison Lee Van Buren, a wealthy, handsome, snobbish industrialist, who becomes László's primary client, but is envious of his artistic creativity
Joe Alwyn as Harry Lee Van Buren, Harrison's entitled and pompous son
Raffey Cassidy as Zsófia, László's orphaned teenage niece, who has become mute after surviving the Holocaust, also at Dachau
Cassidy also briefly portrays Zsófia's young adult daughter
Ariane Labed as adult Zsófia
Stacy Martin as Maggie Van Buren, Harry's kinder twin sister
Alessandro Nivola as Attila, a furniture store owner in Philadelphia and László's cousin, who immigrated to America before the war and is more assimilated into the culture
Emma Laird as Audrey, Attila's Catholic wife
Isaach de Bankolé as Gordon, László's friend, a single father
Michael Epp as Jim Simpson, a mundane architect
Jonathan Hyde as Leslie Woodrow, a builder hired by Harrison to realize László’s design
Peter Polycarpou as Michael Hoffman, Harrison's Jewish attorney
Maria Sand as Michelle Hoffman, Michael's wife, a converted Jew
Salvatore Sansone as Orazio, László's friend in Carrara, an Italian anarchist who fought against Mussolini


== Production ==


=== Development ===

In September 2018, Deadline reported that director Brady Corbet had chosen the period drama The Brutalist as his next project following the world premiere of his second feature film, Vox Lux. New York-based Andrew Lauren Productions (ALP) developed the screenplay with Corbet and financed the film. Corbet co-wrote the screenplay with his partner Mona Fastvold, with whom he co-wrote the 2015 film The Childhood of a Leader and the 2018 film Vox Lux. The film was originally announced as a co-production between Andrew Lauren and D.J. Gugenheim for ALP, Trevor Matthews and Nick Gordon for Brookstreet Pictures, Brian Young's Three Six Zero, and the Polish company Madants, and executive produced by Christine Vachon, Pamela Koffler, and David Hinojosa of Killer Films.

On September 2, 2020, Deadline announced that Joel Edgerton and Marion Cotillard had been cast as the film's leads, László Tóth and Erzsébet Tóth, respectively, and that Mark Rylance was cast in the role of László's mysterious client. Sebastian Stan, Vanessa Kirby, Isaach De Bankolé, Alessandro Nivola, Raffey Cassidy, and Stacy Martin were also announced in unknown roles. Corbet described The Brutalist as "a film which celebrates the triumphs of the most daring and accomplished visionaries; our ancestors", and the project which is so far the closest to his heart and family history. Filming was scheduled to begin in Poland in January 2021. Protagonist Pictures presented the project to buyers at the 2020 Toronto International Film Festival. The film takes place in Pennsylvania and was shot in English, Hebrew, Hungarian, and Italian. The character of László Tóth was inspired by several real-life architects and designers, including Paul Rudolph, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, László Moholy-Nagy, Marcel Breuer, and Ernő Goldfinger. Several of Tóth's furniture designs in the film are highly reminiscent of Breuer's work, including the Cesca Chair and Long Chair.
Director of photography Lol Crawley, editor Dávid Jancsó, and costume designer Kate Forbes were announced on March 9, 2023. Production designer Judy Becker was announced on April 11, 2023. Daniel Blumberg composed the film's score.
On April 11, 2023, it was announced that Adrien Brody, Felicity Jones, Guy Pearce, Joe Alwyn, Jonathan Hyde, Emma Laird, and Peter Polycarpou would star in the film, while Edgerton, Cotillard, Rylance, Stan, and Kirby were no longer attached. It was also announced that the film would be co-produced by the US-based companies Andrew Lauren Productions and Yellow Bear along with the United Kingdom's Brookstreet and Intake Films, and Hungary's Proton Cinema, and financed by Brookstreet UK, Yellow Bear, Lip Sync Productions, Richmond Pictures, Meyohas Studio, Carte Blanche, Cofiloisirs, and Parable Media. CAA Media Finance handles US sales with Protagonist Pictures handling international sales. Focus Features subsequently acquired international distribution rights to the film.


=== Filming ===
Filming was originally set to start in 2020, but it was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was then scheduled to start in January 2021, but it was postponed to August 2021, only to be delayed to the second quarter of 2022. Corbet said filming was postponed several times due to the pandemic as well as several pregnancies and deaths in the families of the film's cast and crew.
After several delays, filming finally began in Budapest, Hungary, on March 16, 2023. Production then moved to Carrara, Tuscany, on April 29, 2023, and was completed on May 5, 2023.
The film was shot using the VistaVision process and cameras that involves shooting horizontally on 35mm film stock, which was then scanned, with the intention of also making prints for a 70mm film release, which has the same height and was the most practical format to show the original size of the VistaVision frame when projecting film. Corbet explained the choice of VistaVision was also aesthetic: "It just seemed like the best way to access that period (1950s) was to shoot on something that was engineered in that same decade." The film is presented in two acts with a 15-minute intermission, plus an epilogue.


=== Music ===

The film's score was composed by English musician Daniel Blumberg, who had previously worked with Corbet on the short film Gyuto (2019). The two worked together on the film over a span of seven years. The album containing the score was released through Milan Records on December 13, 2024. Blumberg and Corbet wanted continuous music for the film's first 10 minutes, resulting in the opening sequence of The Brutalist being choreographed and shot to Blumberg's demos. The overture features pianists John Tilbury, Sophie Agnel, and Simon Sieger, trumpeter Axel Dörner, and saxophonist Evan Parker, all of whom appear throughout the soundtrack. Synth-pop musician Vince Clarke plays the synthesizer on "Epilogue (Venice)".
The experimental "Construction" was the first track Blumberg wrote for the score; an early demo was composed on a prepared piano at London's Cafe Oto to create a sound similar to construction noises. "Erzsébet", one of the score's themes, was played by Blumberg live on a piano since Corbet wanted the actors to hear the music while shooting; the train noises from the scene were eventually incorporated into the track's final version.


=== Post-production and controversy ===
Editing was completed by Hungarian editor Dávid Jancsó. In an interview with RedShark News, Jancsó revealed that artificial intelligence (AI) tools from Respeecher, a Ukrainian software company, were deployed in order to improve the authenticity of Adrien Brody and Felicity Jones's Hungarian dialogue. Both actors received dialect coaching, but the filmmakers wanted to perfect their pronunciation "so that not even locals will spot any difference." Unsuccessful ADR work prompted them to record Brody and Jones's voices into Respeecher; Jancsó, a native Hungarian speaker, also fed in his voice to "finesse the tricky dialect." 
Corbet issued the following statement to Deadline Hollywood after Jancsó's interview sparked backlash on social media:

[Brody] and [Jones]'s performances are completely their own. They worked for months with dialect coach Tanera Marshall to perfect their accents. Innovative Respeecher technology was used in Hungarian language dialogue editing only, specifically to refine certain vowels and letters for accuracy. No English language was changed. This was a manual process, done by our sound team and Respeecher in post-production. The aim was to preserve the authenticity of [Brody] and [Jones]'s performances in another language, not to replace or alter them and done with the utmost respect for the craft.
Additionally, it was claimed that generative artificial intelligence was utilized to conjure a series of architectural blueprints and finished buildings in the film's closing sequence. In a 2022 Filmmaker article, Becker claimed the film's architecture consultant used Midjourney "to create three brutalist buildings quite quickly." However, Corbet denied this in a subsequent interview: "Judy Becker and her team did not use AI to create or render any of the buildings. All images were hand-drawn by artists. To clarify, in the memorial video featured in the background of a shot, our editorial team created pictures intentionally designed to look like poor digital renderings circa 1980." "The Brutalist is a film about human complexity, and every aspect of its creation was driven by human effort, creativity, and collaboration. We are incredibly proud of our team and what they’ve accomplished here."


== Release ==
The Brutalist had its world premiere at the 81st Venice International Film Festival on September 1, 2024, where it competed for the Golden Lion and won the Silver Lion for Corbet. It also played at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 6, 2024. The film's festival run also included selections for screenings at the 2024 New York Film Festival, the 69th Valladolid International Film Festival, and the 31st Austin Film Festival. A week after its premiere at Venice, A24 acquired U.S. distribution rights to the film for "just under $10 million" in what was described as a competitive situation. It was released in the U.S. by A24 on December 20, 2024, and was released in the United Kingdom by Focus Features through Universal Pictures UK on January 24, 2025. In Canada, it was distributed by Elevation Pictures.
It was screened in IMAX theaters two days prior to its limited theatrical release for New York and Los Angeles before being screened in IMAX nationwide throughout January.
It was featured in the Limelight section of the 54th International Film Festival Rotterdam to be screened in February 2025.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The Brutalist made $266,791 from four theaters in the US in its opening weekend, and then $211,164 in its second weekend and $244,341 in its third. In its fourth weekend, the film expanded to 68 theaters and made $1.38 million. Its figure was noted as outperforming Better Man, which made $1.1 million from 1,291 theaters over the same frame. The following weekend it grossed $2 million from 338 theaters (and a total of $2.4 million over the four-day MLK holiday). After earning 10 Oscar nominations, the film expanded to 1,118 theaters, and made $2.9 million over the weekend.


=== Critical response ===

The Brutalist received critical acclaim. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 284 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.7/10. The website's consensus reads: "Structurally beautiful and suffused with Adrien Brody's soulful performance, writer-director Brady Corbet's immaculately designed The Brutalist is a towering tribute to the immigrant experience." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 90 out of 100, based on 57 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
The film received a five-star review from The Guardian's Peter Bradshaw, who called it "an amazing and engrossing epic". He continued: "The Brutalist obviously takes something from Ayn Rand, but also from Bernard Malamud and Saul Bellow in its depiction of the US immigrant adventure and the promise of success – but maybe Corbet and Fastvold go further and faster into how dizzyingly sensual and sexual it all is". Bradshaw concluded: "It is an electrifying piece of work, stunningly shot by cinematographer Lol Crawley and superbly designed by Judy Becker. I emerged from this movie light-headed and euphoric, dizzy with rubbernecking at its monumental vastness." In a review for Vogue, the cinematography, score, costumes, and production design were described as "sumptuous", "impressively stylish", and possessing a "staggering ambition". Some reviews criticized the film, including The Ringer's Adam Nayman and The New Yorker's Richard Brody, with the latter writing that "Brady Corbet’s epic takes on weighty themes, but fails to infuse its characters with the stuff of life."
NPR included the film in their list of the best movies and TV of 2024, with critic Bob Mondello writing that The Brutalist is "Gorgeous, conceptually stunning, and dizzying in its savagery about cracks in the foundation of the American dream." RogerEbert.com writers named The Brutalist in the top slot of the Roger Ebert's Ten Best Films of 2024, which is determined by Borda count of the site's writers. Filmmakers Oliver Stone, Tim Fehlbaum, Drew Goddard, Reinaldo Marcus Green, Don Hertzfeldt, Matt Johnson, Karyn Kusama, David Lowery, Lance Oppenheim, Paul Schrader, Celine Song and Malcolm Washington have cited it as among their favorite films of 2024.


=== Accolades ===

Upon its premiere at the 81st Venice International Film Festival, The Brutalist won five awards, including the Silver Lion. It was subsequently nominated for nine awards at the 30th Critics' Choice Awards, ten awards at the 97th Academy Awards including Best Picture and seven awards at the 82nd Golden Globe Awards, winning three for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director and Best Motion Picture – Drama. In addition, the American Film Institute named The Brutalist as one of the top 10 films of 2024.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Brutalist at IMDb 
The Brutalist at Protagonist Pictures