Jurassic World Rebirth is an upcoming American science fiction action film directed by Gareth Edwards and written by David Koepp. A standalone sequel to Jurassic World Dominion (2022), it is the fourth Jurassic World film and the seventh installment overall in the Jurassic Park film series. The film will star a new ensemble cast led by Scarlett Johansson, Mahershala Ali, and Jonathan Bailey with Rupert Friend, Manuel Garcia-Rulfo, Luna Blaise, David Iacono, and Ed Skrein.
Development of the film was reported in January 2024, and had been underway for some time. Edwards was hired as director a month later, and casting commenced shortly thereafter. Principal photography took place in Thailand, Malta, and the United Kingdom from June to September 2024.
Jurassic World Rebirth is scheduled to be released in the United States and Canada by Universal Pictures on July 2, 2025.


== Plot summary ==
Five years after the events of Jurassic World Dominion, Earth's environment has largely proven inhospitable to dinosaurs. The surviving creatures now reside in remote, tropical locales, reminiscent of the environments where they once flourished. Zora Bennett, a covert operative, is recruited by a pharmaceutical company to collaborate with paleontologist Dr. Henry Loomis and team leader Duncan Kincaid on a top-secret mission. Their objective is to infiltrate a forbidden island—once the site of the original research facility for Jurassic Park—and locate the three largest prehistoric species from land, sea, and air. The DNA of these creatures holds the key to a revolutionary drug capable of saving countless human lives. Along the way, the team encounters a civilian family, and both groups find themselves stranded. They discover that the island is home to mutated, failed dinosaur experiments that have thrived in isolation for decades.


== Cast ==

Scarlett Johansson as Zora Bennett, a covert operation expert
Mahershala Ali as Duncan Kincaid, Zora's team leader
Jonathan Bailey as Dr. Henry Loomis, a paleontologist
Rupert Friend as Martin Krebs, a pharmaceutical representative
Manuel Garcia-Rulfo as Reuben Delgado, the father of a shipwrecked civilian family
Luna Blaise as Reuben's eldest daughter
David Iacono as Reuben's son
Audrina Miranda as Reuben's youngest daughter
Philippine Velge as a member of Zora's team
Bechir Sylvain as Leclerc, also a member of Zora's team
Ed Skrein as a member of Zora's team


== Production ==
Jurassic World Rebirth was written by David Koepp, who also wrote the first two films, Jurassic Park (1993) and The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997). He initially turned down the chance to write another installment, believing he had nothing left to contribute to the series. He was still consulted for subsequent films, and eventually did uncredited script work on Jurassic World Dominion (2022). Director and writer Colin Trevorrow, who spent nine years working on the Jurassic World trilogy, said he would likely not return for another film, except in a possible advisory role.
Development on Jurassic World Rebirth began when executive producer Steven Spielberg asked Koepp about returning to write a new film in the series, which led to an exchange of ideas. Koepp also reread Michael Crichton's novel Jurassic Park (1990) and its sequel The Lost World (1995), incorporating concepts from both books. Rebirth includes a sequence from the first novel that was cut from its film adaptation, in which characters in a raft must evade a T. rex.


=== Pre-production ===
In late January 2024, it was reported that a new Jurassic World film was in development by Universal Pictures. Like the previous Jurassic World films, the new installment would be produced by Frank Marshall and Patrick Crowley through The Kennedy/Marshall Company, while Spielberg would return as executive producer through Amblin Entertainment. The film will be a completely new take. The actors from the Jurassic Park and Jurassic World trilogies, namely Chris Pratt, Bryce Dallas Howard, Sam Neill, Laura Dern, and Jeff Goldblum, were not expected to return.
Development of the project had been underway for some time, with several drafts already written by Koepp. The producers had also done some pre-production work, including dinosaur designs, meaning that any creative input from the eventual director would be minimal. The position was reportedly described as being "more shooter than auteur", as the producers seek to have more creative control than Dominion, which earned mostly negative reviews. With Rebirth, Spielberg and Koepp wanted to return the series to the tone of the Jurassic Park trilogy, particularly the first film. Aside from the inclusion of dinosaurs, Koepp had no story requirements to follow, although he did compile a list of rules for himself; among these was that the film be based on accurate science and that it not retcon any events from the previous films. Paleontologist Stephen Brusatte returns from Dominion as a dinosaur consultant.
David Leitch was briefly in talks to direct the film during early February 2024, but negotiations broke down after several days, as the project's progress up to that point left little room for his creative input. Gareth Edwards was announced as director later that month. Spielberg enjoyed Edwards' Godzilla (2014) and Edwards is a fan of the original Jurassic Park. Edwards had planned to take a break from studio filmmaking and was busy writing a new film when he was offered the Jurassic World project, which he described as "the only movie that would make me drop everything like a stone and dive right in". A scene involving a pterosaur nest was among those modified by Edwards; originally written to take place in a cave, he made the decision to set it inside an abandoned ancient temple instead.
Casting was underway in March 2024, and continued over the next three months. Scarlett Johansson, Jonathan Bailey, Manuel Garcia-Rulfo, Rupert Friend, Mahershala Ali, Luna Blaise, David Iacono, Audrina Miranda, and Béchir Sylvain eventually joined the project. Johansson is a fan of the franchise and had wanted to join it for more than a decade. Jennifer Lawrence had been in consideration for the role that ultimately went to Johansson. Glen Powell, who voiced Dave in the animated series Jurassic World Camp Cretaceous (2020–2022), turned down a role.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began in Thailand on June 13, 2024 under the working title Saga with filming lasting a month in the country. Locations included Khao Phanom Bencha National Park in Krabi, Ko Kradan at Hat Chao Mai National Park in Trang, and Ao Phang Nga National Park in Phang Nga. Filming then moved to the Malta Film Studios in Kalkara, Malta in July 2024. Some stunts were filmed in a tank and ocean shooting took place on the nearby Mediterranean Sea, the latter described by Edwards as a "very difficult" experience. In August 2024, filming moved to London and Sky Studios Elstree in the United Kingdom, before wrapping on September 27, 2024. Some reshoots were made in New York City three weeks later.
John Mathieson served as the cinematographer. For the first time in his career, Edwards shot the project using 35mm film, in order to harken back to the look of the first film, with cameras and anamorphic lenses from Panavision. The dinosaurs and other prehistoric animals were created through a mix of animatronics and computer generated imagery.


== Marketing ==
The film's title and a pair of first-look photos were unveiled on August 29, 2024. The first trailer was released on February 5, 2025, preceded by multiple film stills. Discussing the trailer, Ben Travis of Empire felt the film was "visually stunning" and reminiscent of the first Jurassic Park. A 60-second spot was broadcast at Super Bowl LIX.
Mattel and Lego will produce a line of film-based toys as part of the promotional campaign.


== Release ==
Jurassic World Rebirth is scheduled to be released in the United States on July 2, 2025.


== See also ==
List of films featuring dinosaurs


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Jurassic World Rebirth at IMDb