Heart Eyes is a 2025 American romantic comedy slasher film directed by Josh Ruben, and written by Phillip Murphy, Christopher Landon (who also produces), and Michael Kennedy. The film stars Olivia Holt, Mason Gooding, Gigi Zumbado, Michaela Watkins, Devon Sawa, and Jordana Brewster.
Heart Eyes was theatrically released on February 7, 2025, by Sony Pictures Releasing in North America and by Republic Pictures through Paramount Pictures internationally. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and has grossed $8.3 million worldwide.


== Plot ==
For the past few years, a serial killer known as Heart Eyes has moved from different cities, killing multiple couples on Valentine's Day. In the present year, he moves to Seattle and murders a couple at a winery and then at a spa. Detectives Jeanette Shaw and her partner Hobbs are out on the case and find a wedding ring engraved with J.S.'s initials at the winery.
In Seattle, Ally, a pitch designer for a jewellery company who has recently broken up with her boyfriend, is being ridiculed for a commercial she wrote involving doomed couples, seen as offensive due to the recent string of murders. Her boss, Crystal, orders her to work with famed designer Jay Simmons, whom Ally had encountered at a coffee shop earlier. Jay suggests they have dinner that night to gain inspiration, and Ally's best friend Monica helps her pick out an outfit.
Ally and Jay meet at the restaurant, but the conversation gets heated when they question each other's status and backstories. Jay leaves, and Ally follows, kissing him as she sees her previous boyfriend approaching with his new girlfriend. From a distance, the Heart Eyes killer watches. The two of them reconcile their differences and take a cab to her apartment, where Jay helps her break in after she forgets her key, cutting his hand in the process. She helps tend to his wound upstairs, only for the Heart Eyes killer to attack them. He kills their cab driver and chases them, knocking Jay out in the process. Ally flees and ends up on a carousel before the police arrive. They arrest Jay for the murders due to evidence found with him, though he claims innocence.
At the station, Shaw and Hobbs point out how Jay's initials match the one on the ring, and Shaw points out that he was in the same cities at the same time as the killer's previous attacks. Ally waits in the lobby with the desk clerk and meets David, who was working on the computers. David asks Ally out on a whim, but Ally declines due to her recent stress, and David leaves. The lights go out, and Heart Eyes kills the clerk and attacks Ally. Shaw confronts the killer but disappears while Hobbs is killed. Ally rescues Jay, and they flee to a drive-in movie, where Heart Eyes slaughters several movie-goers. They decide to confront the killer. In the scuffle, Jay manages to stab him, and they unmask him to reveal an unknown man. The two of them are tended to by an ambulance, and Shaw arrives with a hurt arm. She offers Jay a ride home, and he accepts.
At home, Ally realizes she loves Jay and goes to find him at the airport. However, she is unable to find him, and Heart Eyes calls her, telling her to come to the St. Valentine's chapel to rescue him. She arrives, and Heart Eyes unmasks himself as David, who reveals that the previous Heart Eyes they unmasked was Eli, a fanboy. Shaw reveals herself as another Heart Eyes and David's wife. The two of them have committed every murder, switching out the costume. Shaw, in particular, attacked them at the apartment, while David killed the cab driver and the couple at the winery, losing his ring. Their motivation is a kink for killing together for fun. They present Ally with the choice of killing herself or Jay, but she shoots Shaw instead, hitting Jay in the process. The two couples fight as Jay stabs David in the eye with his arrow, resulting in him falling on candles where the wax burns him. Ally ragefully pushes Shaw onto a statue, stabbing her in the neck after stabbing her with a metal straw, as it slowly decapitates her. At the same time, Jay shoots David with his arrow, finally ending the Heart Eyes killer.
One year later, Ally is returning to med school and the couple attend a drive-in movie. Jay asks Ally to move in with him, but she instead proposes and he accepts.
In a mid-credit scene, Ally gets a mysterious phone call in the same threatening tone as previous calls from Heart Eyes, which is then revealed to be Monica, who was photographing the proposal. The phone call then ominously hangs up, in the same way as earlier when the couple at the winery's photographer were murdered.


== Cast ==
Olivia Holt as Ally McCabe
Mason Gooding as Jay Simmons
Gigi Zumbado as Monica, Ally's friend
Michaela Watkins as Crystal Cane, Ally, Jay and Monica’s boss
Devon Sawa as Detective Zeke Hobbs
Jordana Brewster as Detective Jeanette Shaw
Latham Gaines as Nico
Chris Parker as Tommy
Yoson An as David
Josh Ruben as Drive-In Movie Patron


== Production ==
The film is directed by Josh Ruben and produced by Spyglass Media Group. The script is written by Phillip Murphy, Michael Kennedy, and Christopher Landon.
Filming took place in New Zealand in June 2024. In October, it was announced that Jay Wadley was composing the film's score.


== Release ==
In June 2024, Republic Pictures acquired worldwide distribution rights outside the United States and Canada to the film. In September 2024, Sony Pictures acquired the North American distribution rights and released it on February 7, 2025.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
In the United States and Canada, Heart Eyes was released alongside Love Hurts, and was projected to gross $7–8 million from 3,102 theaters in its opening weekend. The film made $3.7 million on its first day,  including $1.1 million from Thursday night previews. It went on to debut to $8.5 million, finishing second behind holdover Dog Man.


=== Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 81% of 106 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.5/10. The website's consensus reads: "A mixture of gory slasher and sweet rom-com that ingeniously nails both formulas, Heart Eyes serves up a bloody valentine that'll make the heart skip a beat." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 62 out of 100, based on 25 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B–" on an A+ to F scale, while those surveyed by PostTrak gave it a 68% overall positive score.


== References ==


== External links ==
Heart Eyes at IMDb