Karla Sofía Gascón (formerly Carlos Gascón; born 31 March 1972) is a Spanish actress. She has developed part of her career in North America, featuring in the comedy film The Noble Family (2013) and the narcoseries El Señor de los Cielos (beginning 2013).
Gascón has gained wide attention for portraying the title character in the musical crime film Emilia Pérez (2024), written and directed by Jacques Audiard. For the role, she jointly won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actress with her three female co-stars, becoming the first transgender actress to win the prize. She also won the European Film Award for Best Actress. She was the first openly transgender actress to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress.


== Early life and education ==
Gascón was born 31 March 1972 in Alcobendas, Spain. In her childhood, she playacted with her brother, and, at 16, she decided to pursue an acting career. She earned an acting degree from the ECAM. She worked in London on a BBC series for Spanish-language learning and in Milan voicing puppets for children's shows.


== Career ==


=== 2002–2009: Early roles in Spain and move to Mexico ===
She appeared in Spanish daily soap opera El súper portraying a flight attendant, as well as in such other shows as Calle nueva and  El pasado es mañana. Early roles also included film appearances in Se buscan fulmontis (1999), Me da igual (2000), Box 507 (2002), and Say I Do (2004).
Convinced by Mexican filmmaker Julián Pastor, Gascón moved to Mexico in 2009 to continue her acting career, taking on a number of telenovela roles, starting with the gypsy Branko in Corazón salvaje. From this year until 2014 she was credit as Juan Carlos Gascón. She made a one-time return to the Spanish film industry to star alongside Tony Isbert in El cura y el veneno. In Mexican box-office hit The Noble Family (2013), she played the supporting role of Peter (the groom of Karla Souza's character Bárbara Noble), a character from Puebla with aspirations of becoming a Spaniard. In 2014, she appeared in El Señor de los Cielos as the "ruthless" Spaniard Iñaki Izarrieta, an associate of Aurelio Casillas.


=== 2018–2024: Transition, Emilia Pérez, and social media comments ===
In 2018, having completed most of her gender transition, Gascón published a magical realist memoir titled Karsia, Una historia extraordinaria (Karsia: an Extraordinary Story) under her birth name. It doubled as a public announcement of her new identity as Karla Sofía Gascón. 
She portrayed Lourdes Buendía in the teen drama series Rebelde (2022). In 2024, she starred in Jacques Audiard's musical crime film Emilia Pérez, which premiered at the 2024 Cannes Film Festival. In the film, she portrayed a powerful cartel leader who is married with children. He fakes death, medically transitions, and assumes a new life as Emilia Pérez. 
Gascón won  the festival's Best Actress prize, shared jointly with her three female costars Selena Gomez, Adriana Paz and Zoe Saldaña. Gascón is the first openly trans actor to win a major prize at Cannes. Later in the year, Gascón became a Chevalière of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. In December 2024, she was reported to have signed on to star as Aunt Encarna in Las malas, an adaptation of Camila Sosa Villada's Bad Girls, set to be directed by Armando Bó.
In January 2025, following Gascón's Academy Award for Best Actress nomination for Emilia Pérez, a series of posts made by Gascón between 2019 and 2021 resurfaced. They were identified as containing bigoted speech against a wide range of communities, including one calling Islam a "hotbed of infection for humanity", and one wondering if the Oscars had become an "Afro-Korean festival", a "Black Lives Matter demonstration", or International Women's Day. Gascón deleted the tweets and apologized, then deactivated her X account the following day. She was dropped from promotional activities for Emilia Pérez, including award shows, and the publication of her book was cancelled. Gascón described herself as a victim of cancel culture.


== Personal life ==
Gascón considers herself "Mexican by adoption", since she has lived and worked in Mexico for many years. She is a Nichiren Buddhist. As of 2025, she lives in Alcobendas, Spain, her hometown. 
Gascón is married to Marisa Gutiérrez, whom she met at the age of 19 at a nightclub in her hometown. Together they have a daughter, born in 2011.


== Selected filmography ==


== Accolades ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Karla Sofía Gascón at IMDb