Irving Domingo Lorenzo Jr. (June 26, 1970 – February 5, 2025), professionally known as Irv Gotti or DJ Irv, was an American record producer. He co-founded the record label Murder Inc. Records in 1998, which was an imprint of Def Jam Recordings. Irv is credited with having helped discover or sign rappers Jay-Z, DMX, and Ja Rule, as well as singers Ashanti and Lloyd. He executively produced the debut albums for DMX's It's Dark and Hell Is Hot, Ja Rule's Venni Vetti Vecci, Ashanti's self titled, and Lloyd's Southside.
Irv received production credits for most of the recordings by artists signed to the label—including Ja Rule (Rule 3:36, Pain Is Love, The Last Temptation, R.U.L.E.), The Inc. (Irv Gotti Presents: The Inc.), Ashanti (Chapter II, Concrete Rose), and Lloyd (Street Love)—as well as singles for other artists such as Jennifer Lopez (I'm Real (Murder Remix), Ain't It Funny (Murder Remix)), Fat Joe (What's Luv), Eve (Gangsta Lovin'), and Kanye West (Violent Crimes), among others. Gotti was also the creator of the BET series Tales.


== Early life ==
Irving Domingo Lorenzo Jr. was born in the Hollis neighborhood of Queens, New York City, on June 26, 1970. Lorenzo was of Filipino descent from his paternal grandfather and of African-American descent. His father Irving was a taxicab driver. He had six siblings, including two sisters and an older brother named Christopher, known as Chris Gotti.


== Career ==
Irv Gotti's career started as a teenager when his sister Christina bought him turntables for his 16th birthday. He would make mixtapes in the family basement and sell them at local barbershops. Irv would go to DJ at parties at local parks and nightclubs in Queens, where he discovered rapper Mic Geronimo. Rappers Rev Run and LL Cool J would visit the home as word spread. Irv then became a talent scout in the A&R department for TVT Records. During his time at TVT, he signed Mic Geronimo and Queens-based rap group Cash Money Click, of which rapper Ja Rule was a member. At the time, he was also briefly a DJ for Jay-Z during the initial rise of his career.
Irv Gotti, under the moniker DJ Irv, produced the song "Can I Live" on Jay-Z's June 1996 debut album, Reasonable Doubt. The big career break came with Jay-Z claiming him to be "The Don of Hip-Hop", giving Irv the moniker Irv Gotti inspired by mobster John Gotti.
In 1997, through Irv, Def Jam signed Ruff Ryders artist DMX. Gotti, as executive producer, oversaw DMX's first studio album, It's Dark and Hell is Hot, released on May 12, 1998. The album debuted and peaked atop the Billboard 200 and sold over 250,000 copies in its first week. The album went on to sell four million copies in the United States, being certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA, and sold five million copies worldwide. 
After helping Def Jam with the success of DMX and Jay-Z, Lyor Cohen gave Irv his own label under Def Jam which he co-founded with his brother Chris. While watching Biography on A&E during gangster week, a Murder, Inc. logo appeared on the screen and Irv decided to use the name for his label because Murder, Inc. put out hits for murder and Irv wanted to put out hit records.
The first album released under Murder Inc. was Ja Rule's debut album, Venni Vetti Vecci, released in June 1999. All of the album was co-produced by Irv, who oversaw the development of the album as executive producer. Irv also produced Ja's second studio album, Rule 3:36. Irv co-produced Rule 3:36's singles, including "Between Me and You".
In 2002, Irv Gotti released Irv Gotti Presents The Inc, featuring the Murder Inc. roster. Irv co-produced all of the album's tracks, including the album's hit single "Down 4 U".
Irv, Ja Rule, and the label Murder Inc. were all involved in a well-publicized feud with G-Unit Records, Aftermath Records, and Shady Records over history between 50 Cent and Ja Rule. After this, Murder Inc. changed their name to "The Inc." 
Under The Inc. banner, Gotti moved the label to Universal Motown and signed Vanessa Carlton, co-producing her third album, Heroes and Thieves, which was released October 9, 2007, with Channel 7, Rick Rubin, and Stephan Jenkins.
In September 2013, Murder Inc. was relaunched as an umbrella label under Gotti's new label, Visionary.


== Legal issues ==
2003 money laundering case
On January 3, 2003, federal agents and New York Police Department investigators raided the headquarters of Murder Inc. Records, located at One Worldwide Plaza in Midtown Manhattan. The raid was a part of a year-long investigation into the connection between the Lorenzo brothers and American drug lord Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff. Investigators believed that the Lorenzos used drug money supplied by McGriff to launch Murder Inc. as a way to launder the illegal funds. Investigators also believed the brothers helped McGriff launder drug money through the making of the 2003 film Crime Partners. Although computers and documents were seized, no charges were immediately filed, and no arrests were immediately made. The raid was dramatized in the music video for Ja Rule's Murder Reigns.
Chris and Irv Gotti's history with McGriff dated back to the mid-1990s, when McGriff, newly paroled from prison, met Chris and Irv through a mutual friend. McGriff wanted to go into film production and sought help from Chris and Irv Gotti to produce and direct a film based on Donald Goines' novel Crime Partners he had read while in jail. The Lorenzos from then on maintained a friendship with McGriff, helping finance the dream film project, Crime Partners.
On January 25, 2005, the Lorenzos surrendered to authorities in New York City and were officially charged with money laundering and conspiracy to launder money. During the trial, Irv Gotti was represented by Gerald B. Lefcourt, and Chris Gotti was represented by Gerald Shargel. In December 2005, the Lorenzos were acquitted of all charges.
2024 sexual assault lawsuit
In July 2024, a lawsuit was filed against Gotti alleging that he sexually assaulted and abused a woman over a two-year period between 2020 and 2022.


== Death ==
Lorenzo had suffered a minor stroke in early 2024 as a result of his diabetes, which caused him to change his dietary habits. On February 5, 2025, he died in New York City at the age of 54, following another stroke.


== Discography ==


=== Singles produced ===
1994
"Shit's Real" (Mic Geronimo)
1998
"Can I Get A..." (Jay-Z featuring Amil & Ja Rule)
"Hot Spot" (Foxy Brown)
1999
"What's My Name" (DMX)
"Holla Holla" (Ja Rule)
2000
"Come Back in One Piece"  (Aaliyah & DMX) 
"Between Me and You" (Ja Rule featuring Christina Milian)
2001
"What's Luv?" (Fat Joe featuring Ashanti & Ja Rule)
"I'm Real (Murder Remix)" (Jennifer Lopez featuring Ja Rule)
"Ain't It Funny (Murder Remix)" (Jennifer Lopez featuring Ja Rule & Caddillac Tah)
"I Cry" (Ja Rule)
"Always on Time" (Ja Rule featuring Ashanti)
2002
"Foolish" (Ashanti)
"Happy" (Ashanti)
"Down 4 U" (Irv Gotti featuring Ja Rule, Ashanti, Vita & Charli Baltimore)
"Mesmerize" (Ja Rule featuring Ashanti)
"Rainy Dayz" (Mary J. Blige featuring Ja Rule)
"Gangsta Lovin" (Eve featuring Alicia Keys)
2003
"Rock wit U (Awww Baby)" (Ashanti)
"Rain on Me" (Ashanti)
2004
"Breakup 2 Makeup" (Ashanti featuring Black Child) 
"Wonderful" (Ja Rule featuring Ashanti and R. Kelly)
2005
"Infatuated" (Memphis Bleek)
2008
"Nice" (The Game) featuring Newz
2018
"Violent Crimes" (Kanye West)
2019
"Brothers" (Kanye West featuring Charlie Wilson)


== References ==


== External links ==
Irv Gotti at IMDb
Irv Gotti discography at Discogs