Yellowjackets is an American thriller drama television series created by Ashley Lyle and Bart Nickerson. The story follows a group of teenagers involved in a 1996 plane crash, and follows the consequences of the event in their adult lives in the year 2021. It stars an ensemble cast led by Sophie Nélisse, Jasmin Savoy Brown, Sophie Thatcher, Samantha Hanratty, Liv Hewson, and Courtney Eaton as a group of teenagers. The adult version of the characters are performed by Melanie Lynskey, Tawny Cypress, Juliette Lewis, Christina Ricci, Lauren Ambrose, and Simone Kessell. Ella Purnell, Steven Krueger, Warren Kole, Kevin Alves and Sarah Desjardins also star.
The series premiered on Showtime on November 14, 2021. It has received critical acclaim, particularly for its story and the performances of the cast. Its accolades include seven Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series and acting nominations for Lynskey and Ricci. In December 2021, the series was renewed for a second season, which premiered on March 26, 2023. In December 2022, the series was renewed for a third season which is set to premiere on February 14, 2025, on Paramount+ with Showtime and broadcast two days later on Showtime.


== Premise ==
In 1996, a New Jersey high school girls' soccer team travels to Seattle for a national tournament. While flying over Canada, their plane crashes deep in the wilderness, and the surviving team members are left stranded for nineteen months. The series chronicles their attempts to stay alive as some of the team members are driven to cannibalism. It also focuses on the lives of the survivors 25 years later in 2021, as the events of their ordeal continue to affect them many years after their rescue.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===

Melanie Lynskey and Sophie Nélisse as the adult and teenage Shauna Shipman. In high school, Shauna is Jackie's best friend but is having an affair with Jackie's boyfriend, Jeff. She was accepted into Brown University prior to the plane crash. After the crash, she immediately adapts to life in the wilderness and grows closer to Taissa. She later discovers she became pregnant with Jeff's child, forcing her to keep it a secret from Jackie. As an adult, she is married to Jeff but is unhappy with her life as a housewife and has a strained relationship with her daughter, Callie. She initiates an affair with Adam after they have an auto collision.
Tawny Cypress and Jasmin Savoy Brown as the adult and teenage Taissa Turner. In high school, Taissa is determined to win the national championship by any means necessary. She injures teammate Allie during soccer practice, believing she is not good enough to play in the tournament. She is secretly dating Vanessa prior to the plane crash and their relationship continues during their time in the wilderness. After the plane crash, she begins sleepwalking which later develops into psychogenic fugue, causing her to wander around the woods in the middle of the night. As an adult, she is married to Simone and owns a pet dog named Biscuit. In the midst of her election campaign for the New Jersey Senate, she begins having problems with her son, Sammy, and the resurgence of her fugue states jeopardizes her marriage.
Ella Purnell as Jackie Taylor (season 1; recurring season 2). In high school, Jackie is the captain of the Yellowjackets soccer team, Shauna's best friend and Jeff's girlfriend. She is accepted into Rutgers University prior to the plane crash. After the plane crash, she has the most difficulty adapting to life in the wilderness and adjusting to life without a high school social structure. Her relationship with her teammates steadily deteriorates and she begins to doubt her friendship with Shauna. After a confrontation with the team she chooses to sleep outside in the freezing cold and dies of hypothermia. She sporadically reappears as a vision to her teammates, particularly Shauna. When they attempt to give her a Viking funeral the fire ends up cooking her flesh which the starving team eats in an act of desperation.
Steven Krueger as Ben Scott, often called Coach or Coach Ben, the assistant coach of the Yellowjackets soccer team. After the plane crash, his right leg is mangled in the wreckage and Misty amputates it to save his life. While being nursed back to health by Misty, he has to simultaneously deal with his injury and the fact that he is the only adult who survived the crash. He is put off by Misty's affections, both because she is underage and he is secretly gay. His later refusal to participate in cannibalism puts him at odds with all of the other survivors.
Warren Kole as adult Jeff Sadecki. In high school, Jeff is Jackie's boyfriend but is cheating on her with her best friend, Shauna. As an adult, he is married to Shauna, the father of Callie, and owns a furniture store.
Jack DePew and Owen Gates portrayed teenage versions of Jeff as guests in seasons 1 and 2 respectively.
Christina Ricci and Samantha Hanratty as the adult and teenage Misty Quigley. In high school, Misty is the equipment manager of the Yellowjackets soccer team. She is frequently bullied and shunned by her teammates, who question her mental stability. After the plane crash, she demonstrates knowledge and skills useful for surviving in the wilderness and pursues her crush on Coach Ben. She later forms a friendship with Crystal over their shared love of musical theatre. As an adult, she works at a nursing home and continues to display manipulative and sadistic tendencies towards her patients. She owns a pet parrot named Caligula and is a member of an online crime solving club called the Citizen Detectives.
Juliette Lewis (seasons 1–2) and Sophie Thatcher as the adult and teenage Natalie "Nat" Scatorccio. In high school, Natalie is frequently judged and harassed by her teammates due to her drug and alcohol abuse. She is best friends with Kevyn prior to the plane crash. After the plane crash, Natalie and Travis prove to be the most proficient with the hunting rifle and the two begin dating. As an adult, she maintains a destructive on-and-off-again relationship with Travis but later breaks up with him. She returns to New Jersey after finishing a rehab program paid for by Taissa, but struggles to maintain sobriety and begins contemplating suicide after Travis's death.
Simone Kessell (season 2–present) and Courtney Eaton (season 2–present; recurring season 1) as the adult and teenage Charlotte "Lottie" Matthews, a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team who has schizophrenia. Her wealthy parents are responsible for providing the private plane that ultimately crashes. After the plane crash, she runs out of medication and begins experiencing disturbing visions, prompting her to seek spiritual guidance from Laura Lee. Her superstitions are gradually adopted by the survivors during their time in the wilderness. After the survivors are rescued, she is involuntarily committed to a mental hospital in Switzerland. As an adult, she becomes a healer and runs a wellness commune called Camp Green Pine. Although she seems to have been cured, her visions unexpectedly return for the first time in decades.
Lauren Ambrose (season 2–present) and Liv Hewson (season 2–present; recurring season 1) as the adult and teenage Vanessa "Van" Palmer. In high school, Vanessa is the goalkeeper of the Yellowjackets soccer team. She is secretly dating Taissa prior to the plane crash and their relationship continues during their time in the wilderness. After the plane crash, she is nearly burned alive in the wreckage but manages to escape. During an expedition, she is mauled by wolves which leaves permanent scarring on the left side of her face. Her belief in Lottie's superstitions strains her relationship with the skeptical Taissa. As an adult, she owns a video store and has recently been diagnosed with terminal cancer.
Kevin Alves (season 2–present; recurring season 1) as the teenage Travis Martinez, Coach Martinez's eldest son and Javi's brother. After the plane crash, Travis and Natalie prove to be the most proficient with the hunting rifle and the two begin dating. He maintains a destructive on-and-off-again relationship with Natalie after the rescue, but when Natalie and Misty find him dead from an apparent suicide, Natalie suspects that he was actually murdered. Prior to his death, he was in contact with Lottie.
Andres Soto portrays an adult Travis as a recurring guest in seasons 1 and 2 as a dead body and in flashbacks.
Sarah Desjardins as Callie Sadecki (season 3; recurring seasons 1–2), Jeff and Shauna's daughter.


=== Recurring ===

Alexa Barajas as Mari, a sarcastic member of the Yellowjackets soccer team. After the plane crash, she becomes deeply devoted to Lottie and her superstitions despite her initial skepticism.
Keeya King (season 1) and Nia Sondaya (season 2-present) as Akilah, a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team who is knowledgeable about edible plants. She adopts a mouse she names Nugget that she keeps in her pocket.
Jane Widdop as Laura Lee (season 1; guest season 2), a deeply Christian member of the Yellowjackets soccer team. After the plane crash, she keeps morale high with the survivors through prayers, and later performs a submersion baptism on Lottie. She finds and repairs an abandoned plane in the woods and takes off to find help only for the plane to explode mid-air. She reappears as a ghost in the visions of several other team members.
Luciano Leroux as Javi Martinez (seasons 1–2), Coach Martinez's youngest son and Travis's brother who struggles to come to terms with the death of his father. He slips through ice and drowns because the girls feel he was "chosen" to die by the wilderness. He is the second person they cannibalize.
Mya Lowe (season 1-2) and Vanessa Prasad (season 3) as Gen, a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team.
Jenna Burgess as Melissa (season 2–present), a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team
Rukiya Bernard as Simone Abara, Taissa's wife
Aiden Stoxx as Sammy Abara-Turner, Taissa and Simone's son
Rekha Sharma as Jessica Roberts (season 1), a reporter hired by Taissa to investigate the survivors of the plane crash
Peter Gadiot as Adam Martin (season 1), an artist who has an affair with Shauna after having an auto collision with her. Shauna murders him after a confrontation and Misty helps her cover it up.
Alex Wyndham (seasons 1–2) and Charlie Wright (guest season 1) and Sean Martin Savoy (guest season 1) as the adult and teenage versions of Kevyn Tan. In high school, he is best friends with Natalie prior to the plane crash. As an adult, he works as a police officer and has a son who plays soccer.
Nicole Maines as Lisa (season 2), a follower of Lottie's who is recovering from trauma
Elijah Wood as Walter Tattersall (season 2–present), a citizen detective who tries to help Misty
Nuha Jes Izman as Crystal (season 2), a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team who forms a friendship with Misty. She loves musical theatre and admits to Misty that her real name is Kristen. After Misty admits to her sabotage of the radio to call for help Crystal becomes angry with her leading to a confrontation where Misty inadvertently backs her off the edge of the cliff, causing her to fall to her death.
François Arnaud as Paul (season 2), a New York writer and Coach Scott's secret boyfriend
John Reynolds as Matt Saracusa (season 2), an undercover detective working with Kevyn on Adam's disappearance
Hilary Swank as TBA (season 3)
Anisa Harris as Robin (season 3), a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team.
Silvana Estifanos as Britt (season 3), a member of the Yellowjackets soccer team.


=== Guest ===
Gabrielle Rose as Mrs. Taylor, Jackie's mother
Carlos Sanz as Coach Bill Martinez, the head coach of the Yellowjackets soccer team and Travis and Javi's father. He is killed in the plane crash and the remaining survivors discover his body impaled by a tree branch.
Tonya Cornelisse and Pearl Amanda Dickson as the adult and teenage versions of Allie Stevens. In high school, Allie is the only freshman on the Yellowjackets soccer team. Her leg is broken by Taissa during soccer practice, leaving her unable to participate in the tournament.
John Cameron Mitchell as Caligula, the human personification of Misty's pet parrot
Joel McHale as TBA (season 3)


== Episodes ==


=== Series overview ===


=== Season 1 (2021–22) ===


=== Season 2 (2023) ===


=== Season 3 ===


== Production ==


=== Development ===
The idea for the series was largely influenced by the Donner Party (1846–1847) and the Andes flight disaster (1972), both true stories about people who resorted to cannibalism to survive. In August 2017, Warner Bros. Pictures announced an all-female film adaptation of William Golding's Lord of the Flies, a novel about a young group of boys stranded on an island. Ashley Lyle read the announcement and found that a lot of people were skeptical that young girls could descend into the same barbarism as young boys. With that thought in mind, she conceived the idea for the series with her husband Bart Nickerson as a "metaphor for teenage hierarchy" and placed a large part of the series in New Jersey, the state they both grew up in. The title, Yellowjackets, came up on a Google search for sports team names; Lyle said it was a "perfect fit thematically" as yellowjackets are "very dependent on a queen and the dynamics of the hive are very specific". Lyle and Nickerson are also credited as showrunners alongside Jonathan Lisco, who was brought to the series by executive producer Karyn Kusama. Lyle added, "I just wanted to tell what felt like a very real story about teenage girls."
Lyle and Nickerson pitched the series with a 35-minute presentation, which included talks about the first season's ending and a five-season storyline. The series was originally going to take place in the 1970s and the 1990s, but both time periods were moved two decades forward to make the setting more familiar to viewers. Nickerson said the use of two timelines allowed for the studying of interpersonal dynamics and how trauma can affect one's life. HBO was a contender to purchase the series but ultimately rejected it, in part due to its similarities with Euphoria, one of its own properties. Lyle says the smartest question she heard during the pre-production phase was from HBO's Francesca Orsi and David Levine, who asked, "What are you trying to say with this show?" In his answer, Nickerson said the show was going to deconstruct the "organizing principles of a society". Yellowjackets was eventually sold to The Mark Gordon Company, a production company owned by Entertainment One. The project was then pitched to Gary Levine, president of entertainment for Showtime Networks, who was immediately on board. On May 9, 2018, Showtime announced it had acquired the rights to the series.

When we were formulating and developing the idea we always saw this as a multi-season story and our goal in the first season is to very much answer certain questions, because I personally get very irritated with shows that drag everything on forever and don't give you any answers. So, we wanted to answer some questions and ask some new ones, so that is hopefully what we accomplished over the course of this season. — Ashley Lyle
On December 16, 2021, after the first five episodes aired, the series was renewed for a second season. Levine said they had "not heard the pitch for season 2, the writers' room has not even come together yet, they are going to come together in January. I'm sure Ashley, Bart, and Jonathan have some loose ideas but they hadn't fleshed out their ideas and they certainly haven't conveyed them to us." On February 9, 2022, Levine said the creators had "always given us hints about things to come, but we haven't done a long-range plan. We wanted to make the first season count. We've all buried ourselves in that first season and worked hard to make it the success it was. They [last week] went into the writer's room and with Jonathan Lisco to start to unearth what can happen in season two. I love that they have some general idea of a five-year arc, but we take it one season at a time and get very granular about making it satisfying." By May 2022, the writers were stated to be in the initial stage of writing the scripts. On December 15, 2022, three months ahead of the second-season premiere, Showtime renewed the series for a third season. Writing began on May 1, 2023, but halted the next day in accordance with the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike. In June 2023, series co-creator Ashley Lyle said that a bonus episode would air between the second and third seasons. However, in December 2024, Lyle confirmed its delay: "The truth is that there is a bonus episode but we may need to wait a bit longer for it".


=== Casting ===


==== Season 1 ====
The pilot episode was not written with any actresses in mind, and auditions were held in Los Angeles. "We decided pretty early on we weren't going to get overly focused on a physical match," Lyle mentioned. As a result, some cast members had to dye their hair and wear contact lenses to match the physical characteristics of their counterparts. Melanie Lynskey was the first person to join the cast. Lyle said the role of Shauna was "the trickiest to cast" because they "wanted to find an actress who could embody somebody who is really trying to figure out who they are, which is kind of a tricky internal thing to express through her acting". Lynskey questioned the showrunners and extracted as much information as she could about her character's past and the five-season storyline to improve her performance. For the role of Natalie, Nickerson said they searched for "someone who was really free-spirited and unique who could play both a sort of wildness and a vulnerability". Though most of the auditions were held in-person, Sophie Thatcher submitted a self-recorded audition tape and was cast as Natalie before Juliette Lewis, who portrays the character's adult counterpart. When asked if the group's survival would depend on their gender, Thatcher replied, "I think naturally, especially at such a young age, women are more emotionally intelligent. So to turn into that cannibalistic mindset ... it maybe took them longer just because I think women are smarter than men. But I think that's it. Besides that, there's no difference. They're going to go batshit crazy."

Nickerson said it was vital to find two actresses who could portray Misty with "a deep kind of humanity that could make it feel lived in and real"; the role was eventually given to Sammi Hanratty and Christina Ricci. On joining the cast, Hanratty said she originally auditioned for the role of Natalie before being brought back four times to audition for the role of Misty: "I'm not gonna lie, I was so crushed [when I didn't get Natalie] because I loved the project. They said they would keep me in mind. Then, I think it was about a week later that I got the audition for Misty, which was so exciting. Because I was like, 'Oh, this girl is interesting as can be." To give her another chance, Lyle and Nickerson wrote a scene specifically for the casting process in which Misty confronts a teacher over cheating. After Hanratty was brought back, Lyle said "It was immediate. As soon as she read that scene for us, we said, 'OK, she is Misty.'" Hanratty described the auditions as being "really intense". She did not meet any of her co-stars until the table read for the pilot. When asked if she was treated differently when in costume, she added, "I don't think we've talked about this, but I was seeing a therapist while I was in Canada, and that was something that we discussed. I was definitely treated differently ... I got more self-conscious, and my walk even changed a bit. I just felt like a bigger target, you know, as a person."
According to Nickerson, Jasmin Savoy Brown and Tawny Cypress were cast as Taissa because they were both able to portray her with a "level of dynamic strength" as well as "vulnerability and fragility". Ella Purnell portrays Jackie, a character who proved difficult to cast. Lyle said the character was supposed to be a stereotypical popular girl with "little cracks of that façade". She explained, "I think that her insecurity, her vulnerabilities needed to be on display pretty early on or you'd end up hating her and that was sort of the opposite of what we wanted the audience to feel." Lynskey, Cypress, and Brown were announced as series regulars in October 2019, with Lewis, Ricci, Purnell, Hanratty, Thatcher, and Sophie Nélisse, joining the cast in November. The following month, Ava Allan, Courtney Eaton, and Liv Hewson were cast in recurring roles. In June 2021, it was reported Warren Kole, Peter Gadiot, Keeya King, Alex Wyndham, Sarah Desjardins, Kevin Alves, and Alexa Barajas would also star.


==== Season 2 ====
Casting for the second season began in mid-2022. In August 2022, Lauren Ambrose and Simone Kessell joined the cast to play the adult versions of Van and Lottie; their roles were also upped from recurring to series regulars. Elijah Wood and Nuha Jes Izman were also added to the cast in season-long recurring guest roles, while Kevin Alves's role as teenage Travis was upped from recurring to series regular. Wood plays Walter, "new citizen detective who is not represented by a younger self on the show". Jason Ritter, who is married to Melanie Lynskey, guest stars in one episode of the second season.
In January 2023, Variety reported that Keeya King, who played teen Akilah in season one, had exited the series. Her role was recast with Nia Sondaya. Nicole Maines was cast as Lisa, an associate of adult Lottie attempting to recover from past trauma. Additionally, François Arnaud guest-stars in four episodes portraying Paul. His character is described as "a New York writer and secret boyfriend of Coach Scott (Steven Kreuger) who reminds Coach Scott of what might have been".


==== Season 3 ====
In September 2024, it was announced that Hilary Swank was cast in a recurring role.


=== Filming ===
The pilot was greenlit in September 2019 and shot in Los Angeles in November. According to location manager Jimmie Lee, several scenes from the pilot were filmed on top of the ski slopes on Mammoth Mountain. The rehab scenes were shot in a mansion located at 26848 Pacific Coast Highway, while a number of scenes set in the high school were filmed in and around John Marshall High School in Los Feliz, Los Angeles. In an interview, Lynskey said the masturbation scene from the pilot represented her character's lack of boundaries. In the pilot's opening scene, a flash-forward shows a group covered in fur clothing. Hanratty was the only cast member present while the scene was shot and the other characters were played by stunt coordinators. Hanratty says the writers have not told the cast which characters appear in that scene: "We all have our theories on who that is too, and we have a group chat in our cast where we try to come up with theories ourselves of what's going on and who we think is who."
In December 2020, Showtime gave Yellowjackets a series order. Filming restarted in Vancouver on May 3, 2021, and concluded in early October, with the young and older cast taking weekly turns to shoot their scenes. Aside from Vancouver, other filming locations included the Panther Paintball & Airsoft Sports Park in Surrey, which was used as the site of the plane crash, and The Bridge Studios in Burnaby. The plane crash scene took two days to shoot. The orgy scene from episode nine was organized with intimacy coordinator Katherine Kadler. Eaton described it as "uncomfortable scene to shoot" due to its depiction of sexual assault. In an interview, Lynskey said Cypress, Ricci, and Lewis stood up for her after she was body shamed by a crew member, with Lewis writing a letter to the producers on her behalf. In November 2021, Purnell summarized the timeline of the production: "Here's how it went; we shot the pilot, we took like a year and a half off in COVID and then we went to Canada and shot the whole season in six months. We were in this super intense immersive bubble. We wrapped three weeks ago and now I'm doing a press junket. It's been crazy."
Filming for the second season began in August 2022, with the first episode directed by Daisy von Scherler Mayer. In early February 2023, the cast of the 1990s timeline of the series completed filming their scenes.
Filming for season three started on May 14, 2024, after having been delayed because of the WGA and SAG-AFTRA strike. Co-showrunners Bart Nickerson and Jonathan Lisco will make their directorial debuts this season, with Nickerson helming the premiere and Lisco episode three.


=== Music ===
The music for the pilot was composed by Theodore Shapiro. The rest of the first season was scored by Craig Wedren and Anna Waronker, members of the rock bands Shudder to Think and That Dog, respectively. Wedren was invited to the series by Kusama after the series was picked up and Shapiro was unable to return. The main theme song, "No Return", was written and performed by Wedren and Waronker, who said they "aimed to channel our off-kilter '90s roots into something that felt like 'then', but could only have been made now, just like the show". Lyle and Nickerson were initially hesitant with the idea of featuring a theme song due to their growing rarity in the mainstream but were eventually convinced otherwise. "Mother Mother" by Tracy Bonham was used as the temp music for the theme, which first appears in episode three and features the sounds of a Farfisa organ. According to Wedren, "The producers really, really encouraged us to go out on multiple limbs and really be experimental and try stuff, which is such a rare direction to get". Lakeshore Records made "No Return" available to stream and download on January 6, 2022. A soundtrack album was also released on Spotify. On March 9, 2023, Florence and the Machine released a cover of No Doubt's "Just a Girl" as a single to promote the second season. The fourth and seventh episodes of season featured a cover of the show's theme song by Alanis Morissette, which was released as a single on April 14, 2023.


== Release ==
A premiere for the series was held on November 10, 2021, at the Hollywood Legion Post 43 in Los Angeles. Yellowjackets debuted on Showtime on November 14. The second season premiered on March 26, 2023, and the episodes became available two days earlier to stream for Showtime subscribers. In November 2024, it was announced that the third season is set to premiere on February 14, 2025, before making its air debut two days later.
The first season was released on DVD and manufactured-on-demand Blu-ray on July 19, 2022. The second season was released on DVD and Blu-ray on October 10, 2023.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===


==== Season 1 ====
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 100% of 77 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.2/10. The website's consensus reads: "A genre mashup that blends smoothly, Yellowjackets presents an absorbing mystery with plenty of sting." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 78 out of 100 based on 28 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
The first six out of ten episodes of the first season were given to critics to review ahead of the series premiere. Entertainment Weekly's Kristen Baldwin graded the show with a B+ and gave praise to the performances and its story: Yellowjackets maintains an intriguing tonal balance in early episodes. The survival timeline is pure horror, all steadily increasing dread and glimpses of grotesque violence. It helps that the flashback cast is strong enough to carry an entire drama on their own; standouts Brown, Thatcher, and Nélisse are particularly adept at delivering performances that feel distinct and yet authentically echo the personas of their adult counterparts.
Candice Frederick from TheWrap found the storyline to be a bit complicated: Yellowjackets can feel tiresome with the sheer frequency of all those flashbacks, and the fact that it dabbles in too many genres when it could settle on its solid mystery thriller elements. But when it commits to its chilling suspense, the show is utterly fascinating to watch. Even more, it finds compelling ways to explore issues like trauma and the façades we build for ourselves that carry from youth through adulthood—elevating what would otherwise be a much flatter genre piece. Writing for Rolling Stone, Alan Sepinwall gave the series three stars and a half out of four and described it as a combination of Lord of the Flies, It, Lost, Alone, and the works of Megan Abbott. Sepinwall added: Many of its influences already overlap, and thus work together well. The ones that don't can at times combine to create something that feels new and potent, but at others make it feel like the stew could have done with fewer ingredients.


==== Season 2 ====
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 171 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.15/10. The website's consensus reads: "Having already made a startling first impression, Yellowjackets coils itself in a second season preparing for the long haul—thankfully, its superb performances and mesmeric ambience are fine substitutes for fast answers." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 77 out of 100 based on 30 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


=== Critics' top ten list ===


=== Ratings ===
Yellowjackets is the second-most streamed series in Showtime's history behind Dexter: New Blood. According to Showtime, the penultimate episode of the first season was watched by 1.41 million viewers across all platforms, while the season finale (the first episode to not air after an episode of Dexter: New Blood) brought 1.3 million viewers across all platforms. Yellowjackets averaged more than 5 million weekly viewers, the highest for a freshman series on the network since Billions in 2016. In January 2022, Vulture's Alison Willmore and Kathryn VanArendonk discussed Showtime's decision to release episodes weekly instead of launching the entire season on the same day, noting the positive word-of-mouth and time given to a viewer to theorize: "In an era when shows and movies seem to barely manage to break through before being pushed aside by whatever's new, and when Netflix is so dominant that other platforms have to really fight for attention at all, Yellowjackets has sustained a conversation all while airing on Showtime."


==== Season 1 ====


=== Awards and nominations ===


== In popular culture ==
On a 2023 episode of Celebrity Family Feud, the elder Yellowjackets competed against the younger ones. The teams were Christina Ricci, Lauren Ambrose, Tawny Cypress, Melanie Lynskey, and Warren Kole against Samantha Hanratty, Courtney Eaton, Jasmin Savoy Brown, Sophie Nélisse, and co-creator Ashley Lyle.


== See also ==
Cannibalism in popular culture


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Yellowjackets at IMDb 
Official screenplay for "Burial"