I'm Still Here (Portuguese: Ainda Estou Aqui ) is a 2024 political biographical drama film directed by Walter Salles from a screenplay by Murilo Hauser and Heitor Lorega, based on Marcelo Rubens Paiva's 2015 memoir of the same name. It stars Fernanda Torres and Fernanda Montenegro as Eunice Paiva, a mother and activist coping with the forced disappearance of her husband, the dissident politician Rubens Paiva, during the military dictatorship in Brazil. Soon after its release in Brazilian theaters on 7 November 2024 by Sony Pictures Releasing International, the film was the target of an unsuccessful boycott by the Brazilian far-right, which denies that the regime was a dictatorship. Grossing $22 million on a $1.5 million production budget, it became the highest-grossing Brazilian film since the COVID-19 pandemic.
The film had its world premiere on 1 September 2024 at the 81st Venice International Film Festival where it received critical acclaim with unanimous praise towards Torres' performance, winning the Best Screenplay award. It was named one of the Top 5 International Films of 2024 by the National Board of Review. At the 82nd Golden Globe Awards, Torres won the Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama category while the film was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film, a category in which it was also nominated at the Critics' Choice Movie Awards and the BAFTA. At the 97th Academy Awards, the film was nominated for Best International Feature Film, Best Actress (Torres) and Best Picture, becoming the first Brazilian-produced film to ever be nominated in that category.


== Plot ==
In 1970, former congressman Rubens Paiva returns to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, after six years of self-exile following the revocation of his tenure at the outset of the 1964 Brazilian coup d'état. Living in an idyllic house near Leblon beach with his wife Eunice and their five children, Paiva returns to his civil career while continuing to support expatriates without discussing his activities with his family.
Following the kidnapping of the Swiss ambassador by far-left revolutionary movements, the country faces a looming political instability. A military raid takes place in Paiva's house, resulting in his arrest and disappearance in January 1971. Eunice's public inquiries on Rubens' whereabouts results in her arrest and torture for 12 days. Eliana, their teenage daughter, is also imprisoned but is released after 24 hours. After moderate media outrage ignited by family and friends, Eunice is unofficially informed of Rubens' fate. 
25 years later, in 1996, Eunice receives from the Brazilian state — now once again a democracy — Rubens Paiva's official death certificate. In 2014, during a family gathering surrounded by her children and grandchildren, the now 85-year-old Eunice lives with advanced Alzheimer's disease. When a news report about the National Truth Commission addresses Rubens' case, a distressed Eunice appears to remember her past.
Closing title cards reveal that Paiva was murdered at the DOI-CODI headquarters between 21 and 22 January 1971. Five people were identified as responsible, yet they were never prosecuted. Eunice graduated from law school at age 48. She became one of few experts on Indigenous Rights, serving as a counselor for the Federal Government, the World Bank, and the United Nations. She died in 2018 at the age of 89.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
The screenplay was written by Murilo Hauser and Heitor Lorega, and adapted from the memoir Ainda Estou Aqui by Marcelo Rubens Paiva, Eunice's son. Hauser also co-wrote the screenplay for Karim Aïnouz's The Invisible Life of Eurídice Gusmão (2019) based on the novel of the same name by Martha Batalha.
Principal photography began in June 2023 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The film was produced by RT Features and VideoFilmes in co-production with Globoplay, Mact Productions, Conspiração Filmes and Arte France Cinéma.


== Release ==

In May 2024, Sony Pictures Classics acquired distribution rights to I'm Still Here in North America, the Middle East, Eastern Europe, Turkey, Portugal, Australia, and New Zealand at the Marché du Film.
The film had its world premiere at the 81st Venice International Film Festival on 1 September 2024, receiving a standing ovation of over 10 minutes; it was in competition for the Golden Lion and won the Best Screenplay prize. It was also screened at the Toronto, New York, and London film festivals in September and October. It had its Asian premiere at China's Pingyao International Film Festival, where Salles was honored with the Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon East-West Award. It was featured in the Limelight section of the 54th International Film Festival Rotterdam to be screened in February 2025.
To qualify for the Best International Feature Film category at the 97th Academy Awards, the film was given a limited theatrical run in the Brazilian city of Salvador from 19 to 25 September 2024, followed by a nationwide release on 7 November 2024 by Sony Pictures Releasing.
I'm Still Here was released in France on 15 January 2025 by StudioCanal. In the United States, the film received a one-week awards-qualifying run in November 2024 and received a limited theatrical release in New York City and Los Angeles on 17 January 2025, before expanding to more cities on 14 February.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
On its opening day in Brazil, I'm Still Here brought 50,320 people to the cinemas, grossing R$1.1 million. In its first weekend, even though it was the target of a frustrated boycott by the Brazilian far-right, the film debuted in first place at the box office with 358,000 admissions, earning R$8.6 million, surpassing the third week of Venom: The Last Dance (R$6.6 million) and fellow new release Red One (R$5.3 million).
By January 2025, the film had surpassed 4 million admissions, and became the highest-grossing Brazilian film since the COVID-19 pandemic, with earnings of US 15.4 million.


=== Critical response ===

I'm Still Here received overwhelming praise upon release by the public, film critics and the Brazilian and international press; praise was mainly directed to Fernanda Torres' performance. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 96% of 114 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.2/10. The website's consensus reads: "Carried along by Fernanda Torres' superb performance, I'm Still Here poignantly explores a nation's upheaval through one family's search for answers." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 86 out of 100, based on 34 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". 
Jessica Kiang of Variety praised the film and its dramatic charge: "Classical in form but radical in empathy, I'm Still Here arguably does not need the follow-up sections—one set in 1996 and the other in 2014—that somewhat alter the emotional rhythm. But on the other hand, these characters are so vivid that we don't want to leave them either". For Wendy Ide of Screen Daily, Salles "never over-labours the film's emotional beats, relying instead on Torres' magnificent, intricately layered performance to drive the picture"; she also praised Montenegro, "who has a brief but exceptionally powerful cameo here as the elderly Eunice".
Several international outlets applauded Fernanda Torres' work, with Collider considering it one of the best performances of the year, being "more than deserving of an Oscar nomination". In her review for Deadline, Stephanie Bunbury describes the film as a "celebration of Brazil", and praises Torres, stating that the actress "has an emotional delicacy as Eunice that conveys, through the smallest and subtlest signals, what it costs her to hold back her anxiety and anger for the sake of her family. It is a performance that should catapult her into the awards race, 25 years after her mother Fernanda Montenegro was Oscar-nominated for Salles' breakthrough feature, Central Station". David Rooney in The Hollywood Reporter highlighted the relationship between Montenegro and Torres, saying "What makes the connection even more poignant is that she appears as the elderly, infirm version of the protagonist", and recognized I'm Still Here as "a gripping, profoundly touching film with a deep well of pathos. It's one of Salles' best". For IndieWire, Leila Latif says Torres' performance "is as spectacular as her filmography would suggest, having marked herself out as one of the South American continent's greatest actors in roles in Foreign Land (also directed by Salles) and won a Best Actress Award in Love Me Forever or Never. Her Eunice possesses phenomenal strength and stoicism which make each moment of pain that peep through the chinks of her armor all the more moving", and praised her on-screen interaction with Selton Mello.
Filmmaker Alfonso Cuarón named it one of his favorite films of 2024, stating "Watching a Walter Salles film is to be embraced in generosity, is like experiencing a gravitational pull, both lifting and grounding us at the same time with an invisible yet undeniable force. With I'm Still Here, this effect is even more compelling.
It was named one of the Top 5 International Films of 2024 by the National Board of Review, and one of 50 Best Films of the year by British film magazine Sight & Sound.


=== Accolades ===
The film received several awards and nominations. At the 82nd Golden Globe Awards, the film received two nominations: Best Foreign Language Film and Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama for Torres. Torres won in her category, becoming the first Brazilian actress to win a Golden Globe in an acting category. The film was also nominated for Best Film Not in the English Language at the 78th British Academy Film Awards. At the 97th Academy Awards, received three nominations including Best Picture, becoming the first time a Brazilian film is nominated in the category.


== See also ==
List of submissions to the 97th Academy Awards for Best International Feature Film
List of Brazilian submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film


== References ==


== External links ==

I'm Still Here at IMDb 
Official Screenplay Archived 30 December 2024 at the Wayback Machine