Sahib Singh Verma  (15 March 1943 – 30 June 2007) was an Indian politician and the former senior vice-president of the Bharatiya Janata Party. He served as Chief Minister of Delhi (1996–1998) and was member of 13th Lok Sabha, Parliament of India (1999–2004). He served as the Union Labour Minister of India.


== Life ==
Sahib Singh Verma was born on 15 March 1943 in Mundka village of Delhi to Chaudhary Mir Singh Verma, a zamindar, and Bharpai Devi in a Jat family. He had 2 brothers Azad Singh Verma and Attar Singh Verma. He was influenced by Arya Samaj from an early age.
Singh had a PhD degree in Library Science, and started work as librarian in Bhagat Singh College, Delhi. He held a master's degree in Arts, (M.A.) and also in Library Science from Aligarh Muslim University.
He was married to Sahib Kaur and had two sons and three daughters. One of his sons, Parvesh Verma is serving as Member of Delhi Legislative Assembly from New Delhi.


== Political career ==
He was active in the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. He had also served the World Jat Aryan Foundation, as its president.

In 1977 he was elected to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and took the Oath as a Councillor by the hands of Guru Radha Kishan. Initially he won as a Janata Party candidate and was re-elected on a BJP ticket. He became the Education and Development Minister in the Delhi government in 1993.
In 1996, after Madan Lal Khurana was embroiled in a corruption crisis, Sahib Singh became the Chief Minister of Delhi. Singh served as CM for two and a half years, facing increasing rivalry from Khurana. Following an onion price crisis, he was replaced by Sushma Swaraj.
Subsequently, he won the Lok Sabha elections, 1999 from Outer Delhi with a margin of over two lakh votes. In 2002, he became Minister of Labour in the Vajpayee government, and was known as "bull in a China shop" for standing up against the bureaucrats against lowering the Provident Fund interest rate. He was defeated in the 2004 polls.
He died in a road accident in Rajasthan in 2007.


== See also ==
Verma cabinet


== References ==


== External links ==
Kulkarni, Raju (16 September 1999). "The Sahib Singh Verma Chat". Rediff on the NeT.