The Monkey is an upcoming American horror comedy film based on the 1980 short story "The Monkey" by Stephen King. The film adaptation is written and directed by Osgood Perkins. It stars Theo James, Tatiana Maslany, Elijah Wood, Christian Convery, Colin O'Brien, Rohan Campbell, and Sarah Levy.
Neon will release The Monkey in theaters in the United States on February 21, 2025.


== Premise ==
After stumbling upon their father's vintage toy monkey in the attic, twin brothers Hal and Bill witness a string of horrifying deaths unfolding around them. In an attempt to leave the haunting behind, the brothers discard the monkey and pursue separate paths over time. However, when the inexplicable deaths resurface, the brothers are compelled to reconcile and embark on a mission to permanently eliminate the cursed toy.


== Cast ==
Theo James as Hal and Bill Shelburn
Christian Convery as young Hal and Bill
Tatiana Maslany as Lois Shelburn, Hal and Bill's mother
Elijah Wood as Ted Hammerman
Colin O'Brien as Petey, Hal's son
Rohan Campbell as Ricky
Sarah Levy as Ida, Hal and Bill's aunt
Adam Scott as Capt. Petey Shelburn, Hal and Bill's absent father
Oz Perkins as Chip, Hal and Bill's uncle
Nicco Del Rio as a pastor


== Production ==
Director Frank Darabont originally held the film rights to Stephen King's short story "The Monkey" and planned to begin working on a film adaptation upon completing The Mist (2007), itself an adaptation of one of King's novellas. The project never materialized.
Going into the 2023 Cannes Film Market, financer Black Bear Pictures announced that a film adaptation of "The Monkey" was in development and up for sale to distributors. Osgood Perkins was hired to write and direct, and James Wan would produce under his Atomic Monster banner. Theo James was cast in the lead role. In March 2024, Tatiana Maslany, Elijah Wood, Christian Convery, Colin O'Brien, Rohan Campbell and Sarah Levy were revealed to have joined the cast.
Principal photography ran in Vancouver from February 5 to March 22, 2024. The original story by Stephen King features a cymbal-banging monkey, but the film replaces the cymbals with a drum. According to Perkins, this change was made due to the rights to cymbal-banging version of the toy being owned by The Walt Disney Company, as the toy had appeared as a character in Toy Story 3. In writing the film, Perkins chose to give the film comedic elements because he thought it was more fitting for a film about a toy, and he wanted to distinguish The Monkey from more serious horror films about possessed toys. Perkins further stated that the comedy in the film intentionally avoids subtlety and makes use of extreme gore to joke about the absurdity, pointlessness, and randomness of death.


== Marketing ==
The film's official trailer released on January 16, 2025, and amassed over 43 million views online within 24 hours. After 72 hours, it had over 100 million views; according to Neon, this made it "the most watched independent horror film trailer ever". In late January, Neon attempted to air a trailer for the film on four major television networks, and all four rejected the studio, citing the film's "excessive violence". Neon released screenshots of the email discussions with the networks, although identifying information was redacted.


== Release ==
In May 2024, Neon won a bidding war between multiple US distributors for domestic rights at the Marché du Film and set a theatrical release date for 2025. The film is scheduled to be released in the US on February 21, 2025. The Monkey marks the second collaboration between Neon and Perkins after Longlegs (2024). Prior to its official February release, the film was screened early in January at Grauman's Egyptian Theatre as part of Beyond Fest.


== Reception ==
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 89% of 27 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.5/10.  According to Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 71 out of 100, based on 8 critics.
Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com gave the film three out of four stars and wrote, "Perkins has always been a formally confident filmmaker, but The Monkey contains some of his most striking imagery, shot through with malice by Nico Aguilar, and perfectly assembled by editors Graham Fortin & Greg Ng (who also cut Longlegs)." Stephen King, the author of the original story, praised the film, describing it as "batshit insane".
Siddhant Adlakha from Inverse gave the film a less positive review, describing it as "tonally haphazard" and criticizing it for a "lack of dramatic coherence". He argued that the film's irony and snark undermine any intended commentary about parenthood or death, comparing it unfavorably to Deadpool.


== See also ==
List of adaptations of works by Stephen King


== References ==


== External links ==
The Monkey at IMDb