Solána Imani Rowe (born November 8, 1989), known professionally as SZA (  SIZ-ə), is an American singer-songwriter. She first garnered attention with her self-released extended plays (EPs) See.SZA.Run (2012) and S (2013), leading to her becoming the first female artist signed to Top Dawg Entertainment. Her third EP, Z (2014), was her first project released to digital retailers and reached the top ten on the US Independent Albums chart.
After signing a joint recording deal with RCA Records, SZA released her debut studio album, Ctrl (2017), to critical and commercial success. The album earned four Grammy Award nominations and became the second longest-charting R&B album by a female artist on the US Billboard 200. The following year, her Kendrick Lamar collaboration "All the Stars"—a top-ten single in both the US and UK—earned her Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations for Best Original Song. Her feature on Doja Cat's "Kiss Me More" set a record as the longest-running all-female collaboration in the US top-ten and won SZA her first Grammy Award.
SZA's second studio album, SOS (2022), spent twelve weeks at number one on the Billboard 200 and set a record for the largest streaming week for an R&B album in the US. It was supported by five top-10 singles, including her first Billboard Hot 100 number-one "Kill Bill", as well as "Snooze", which became one of the longest-charting songs in the US. She earned her second chart-topping song that same year, with a guest feature on Drake's "Slime You Out". A reissue for SOS, Lana (2024), scored another top-ten single, "Saturn". SZA made her acting debut in the comedy film, One of Them Days (2025), and performed in the Super Bowl LIX halftime show alongside Kendrick Lamar.
SZA has earned numerous accolades throughout her career, including five Grammy Awards, a Brit Award, an American Music Award, a Guild of Music Supervisors Award, and two Billboard Women in Music awards, including Woman of the Year. She has co-written songs for artists such as Nicki Minaj, Beyoncé, Travis Scott, Schoolboy Q, and Rihanna. In 2024, she received the Hal David Starlight Award from the Songwriters Hall of Fame.


== Early life and education ==
Solána Imani Rowe was born in St. Louis, Missouri, on November 8, 1989. She grew up in Maplewood, New Jersey. Rowe's parents were both from the southern part of the United States; her mother, Audrey, was an executive at AT&T, while her father, Abdul, was an editor at CNN. Rowe has a half-sister, Panya, who is eleven years older than her, and a brother, Daniel, who is a rapper known by the stage name Manhattan. Rowe shared with The New York Times that her mother affectionately nicknamed her "Chickabee", derived from the film Nell (1994). Audrey is Christian, while Abdul is Muslim. Her father would attend her mother's church for special occasions, while her mother would dress up for Jum'ah and accompany her father to the mosque. She attended both Sunday school and Muslim school.

It's like the belief in one God, all the pillars of Islam et cetera, and I think those are ideas that will never leave me, those make sense in my spirit. It's the way that I connect with God; it has always made sense to me. I think I would love to wear my hijab but I feel like I don't wanna wear my hijab and talk crazy on stage and be in videos with Travis Scott. Like I don't wanna be disrespectful because I have too much love and respect for the religion, for my father, and for myself.
During elementary and early middle school, Rowe wore a hijab. However, following the September 11 attacks, she feared bullying in middle school due to Islamophobia and decided to stop wearing it. She later attended Columbia High School, where she participated in the school's gymnastics and cheerleading teams, as well as its dance team dubbed the Special Dance Company. After graduating in 2008, Rowe enrolled in three different colleges before settling at Delaware State University to study marine biology. She ultimately dropped out in her final semester to focus on her music career and worked various jobs to support herself. After dropping out, Rowe drank Malibu, smoked weed, and overslept daily. She lied about her age to get a bartending job and occasionally dance at several strip clubs in New Jersey and New York City. Rowe formed her stage name, SZA, from the Supreme Alphabet, taking influence from rappers RZA and GZA of the Wu-Tang Clan. The last two letters in her name stand for Zig-Zag and Allah, while the first letter S can mean either savior or sovereign.


== Career ==


=== 2011–2014: Career beginnings and EPs ===

SZA first met members of Top Dawg Entertainment (TDE) during the CMJ New Music Report in 2011, when her boyfriend's clothing company sponsored a show in which Kendrick Lamar was performing. SZA's early music was shared with TDE president Terrence "Punch" Henderson, who was impressed by the quality of the material. SZA's early music was recorded with friends and neighbors, with many of the beats "stole[n]" from the Internet. SZA self-released her debut extended play (EP) See.SZA.Run on October 29, 2012. The extended play was met with positive reviews upon release. The Guardian commended the album, its lyrical content and production, and compared the album to the work of musicians including Drake and the Weeknd.
SZA self-released her second EP, S, on April 10, 2013. It was positively received; Consequence of Sound thought that the "dreamy [and] warped [album] manage[d] to exude confidence and fragility". SZA promoted the extended play with the release of a music video for the EP's lead single, "Ice.Moon". SZA and Punch stayed in contact, and after SZA began garnering attention with the release of her two EPs, TDE stepped in to sign her on July 14, 2013, making her the label's first female artist. In October 2013, SZA joined Swedish band Little Dragon for a four-show tour, beginning on October 17 at the El Rey Theater in Los Angeles and concluding on October 24 at the Music Hall of Williamsburg in Brooklyn. That December, she released the song "Teen Spirit", which was later remixed with a guest verse from rapper 50 Cent. The remix was accompanied by a music video directed by APlusFilmz.
In 2014, SZA was featured on multiple tracks from her labelmates' projects, including two songs on Isaiah Rashad's debut EP, Cilvia Demo, and a collaboration on Schoolboy Q's debut album, Oxymoron. She followed up with the release of her third studio EP, Z, on April 8, led by the single "Babylon" featuring Lamar, which was accompanied by a music video directed by APlusFilmz. To promote the EP, SZA performed at several showcases during the SXSW Music Festival in Austin, Texas. Z marked SZA's chart debut in the UK, reaching number 32 on the R&B chart for the week ending April 19. In the US., the EP debuted at number 39 on the Billboard 200, selling 6,980 copies in its first week, and peaked at number nine on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. That November, SZA released "Sobriety" via SoundCloud, which the singer described as "not R&B". In the following month, SZA and the Internet supported Jhené Aiko's "Enter The Void" tour. SZA began recording the first songs for her forthcoming debut album in 2014.


=== 2015–2018: Ctrl and breakthrough ===
While working on her fourth EP, A, which would later become her debut album, SZA began writing songs for other singers, including Nicki Minaj and Beyoncé on "Feeling Myself", as well as Travis Scott on "Ok Alright". SZA also co-wrote "Consideration" for Rihanna's 2016 album Anti, alongside Rihanna and Tyran Donaldson. In addition to contributing as a songwriter, she was also featured on the track. SZA later joined Rihanna for a live performance of "Consideration" at the 2016 Brit Awards. Around this time, she collaborated with several of her labelmates on various projects, including Ab-Soul on "Lonely Soul/The Law (Prelude)", Schoolboy Q on "Neva Change", Isaiah Rashad on "Stuck in the Mud", and Kendrick Lamar on "Untitled 04 | 08.14.2014".
After signing a contract with RCA Records in April 2017, SZA released her debut studio album, Ctrl, on June 9. Originally slated for release in 2015, the release was marred by several delays rooted in disagreements between SZA and TDE executives. Struggling with perfectionism and the selection of tracks, she became frustrated with the process. In 2016, she expressed her frustration on Twitter, stating that she was considering quitting music and allowing TDE president Punch to release Ctrl on her behalf. In mid-2017, an unknown person took the hard drive containing the album's music.Described as an R&B album with elements of jazz and alternative, Ctrl was released to universal acclaim from music critics, earning a score of 86 out of 100 on Metacritic. The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, with 125,000 album-equivalent units. The album spawned five singles: "Drew Barrymore", "Love Galore", "The Weekend", "Broken Clocks", and "Garden (Say It like Dat)", all of which are certified Double Platinum or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Ctrl was ranked as one of the best albums of 2017 by several critics, being named the best by Time, New York Daily News, and Vice. Between August 2017 to February 2018, SZA promoted the album on a North American and Oceanic concert tour consisting of more than fifty shows. SZA opened for the European portion of Bryson Tiller's "Set It Off Tour" in support of his album True to Self from October 17, 2017, to November 30, 2017, separate from SZA's tour.
In August 2017, SZA collaborated with the American pop rock band Maroon 5 on their single "What Lovers Do", from their sixth studio album, Red Pill Blues. The track peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100, marking SZA's first top-ten hit. The following month, she released "Quicksand", which was included on the second soundtrack for HBO's Insecure. Around the same time, she joined Khalid and Post Malone on the remix of Lorde's single "Homemade Dynamite", from her album Melodrama. In October, SZA, alongside Mark Ronson and Tame Impala, began working on a joint album project. In November 2017, SZA received five Grammy nominations, including Best New Artist. She was the most-nominated female artist at the 2018 Grammy Awards. Despite her multiple nominations, she did not win in any category.
In January 2018, SZA collaborated with Lamar on "All the Stars", the lead single from the soundtrack album of the film Black Panther. The song peaked at number seven on the Hot 100, marking SZA's second top-ten hit, following her feature on "What Lovers Do". In April, she worked with rapper Cardi B on the track "I Do", which was featured on Cardi B's debut album, Invasion of Privacy.


=== 2019–2023: Collaborations and SOS ===

In May 2019, SZA was featured on "Just Us", a track from DJ Khaled's eleventh studio album, Father of Asahd. In February 2020, she collaborated with Justin Timberlake on "The Other Side", a song from the Trolls World Tour soundtrack. The following month, SZA signed with WME for representation across all areas. On April 22, 2020, she participated in a benefit concert alongside artists such as Bruce Springsteen, Bon Jovi, and Halsey to support New Jersey's COVID-19 pandemic relief efforts. The event featured at-home performances, with proceeds directed to the New Jersey Pandemic Relief Fund. On May 25, 2020, SZA expressed interest on Twitter in releasing a collection of previously unreleased songs, potentially consisting of twenty tracks.
In August 2020, SZA sparked speculation about label tensions when she tweeted and deleted, "At this point y'all gotta ask Punch", referring to Terrence "Punch" Henderson, the president of TDE. In a follow-up tweet, she mentioned that all he ever told her about releasing new music was "soon". This revealed that her relationship with her label has been hostile since the delays of her second album, which was last announced back in an interview in 2019. SZA made her long-awaited return as a lead artist on September 4, 2020, with "Hit Different", featuring Ty Dolla Sign and produced by the Neptunes. On December 25, she officially released "Good Days" after previewing it in the outro of the "Hit Different" music video. The track, which featured background vocals from English singer Jacob Collier, peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100, making it SZA's first solo top-ten hit. She later revealed that "Good Days" was not initially planned as a single. Both songs were originally expected to be included on her upcoming second studio album, but "Good Days" ultimately made the final tracklist.
In April 2021, SZA was featured on Doja Cat's single "Kiss Me More", the lead single from her album Planet Her. The track became a global success, reaching number one in New Zealand and landing in the top ten on the charts in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Ireland, and Lithuania. Later that year, SZA released a cover of "The Anonymous Ones", a song written for the soundtrack of the 2021 film adaptation of Dear Evan Hansen. In December 2021, SZA officially released the single "I Hate U", after the song went viral on TikTok; it was initially released exclusively on SoundCloud in August. Following the 64th Annual Grammy Awards, SZA confirmed that her second studio album was completed and would be released "soon".
On June 9, 2022, SZA released a deluxe edition of Ctrl to celebrate its five-year anniversary. This version included seven previously unreleased tracks, such as "TwoAM", "Jodie", "Percolator", and an alternate version of "Love Galore" without Travis Scott. On October 28, 2022, SZA released a new single, "Shirt", accompanied by a music video starring actor LaKeith Stanfield. Originally teased in late 2020, the song gained traction on TikTok through a viral challenge. A snippet was later featured as the outro in the official music video for "Good Days". At the end of the "Shirt" music video, SZA previewed another track, which she later confirmed was titled "Blind".
On her 33rd birthday, November 8, 2022, SZA released a teaser titled "PSA" on Instagram. The video ended with Morse code spelling out "S.O.S.", sparking speculation about a new project. On November 16, 2022, Billboard officially confirmed that her second studio album would be titled SOS and was set for a December release. After performing "Shirt" and "Blind" on Saturday Night Live, SZA announced that the album would be released on December 9, 2022. Wanting to demonstrate her versatility, she incorporated an amalgam of genres on her second album, such as R&B, rap, rock, and pop. In addition to the single "Good Days", "Shirt", and "I Hate U", SOS spawned three extra singles: "Nobody Gets Me", "Kill Bill", and "Snooze". "Kill Bill" was SZA's first number-one on the Billboard Global 200 and Hot 100 charts, while "Snooze" was the only song to chart on the Hot 100 for the entirety of 2023. 
SOS spent its first seven weeks at number one on the Billboard 200—the longest run for a female album in the decade and the first R&B album to achieve this since Whitney Houston's Whitney (1987). To promote the album, SZA embarked on the SOS Tour from 2023 to 2024, performing 63 shows across North America, Europe, and Oceania. Omar Apollo, d4vd, Raye, and Sir served as opening acts for different legs of the tour. In March 2023, SZA modeled for Kim Kardashian's fashion brand, Skims, representing the "Fits Everybody" collection, which includes size-inclusive T-shirts, bodysuits, and intimate apparel. In September 2023, SZA collaborated with Drake on the single "Slime You Out" for the latter's eighth album, For All the Dogs. "Slime You Out" was SZA's second song to top the Hot 100 chart, following "Kill Bill".


=== 2024–present: Lana and acting debut ===

SZA released "Saturn" on February 22, 2024, which reached top ten on both the Billboard Hot 100 and Global 200.  "Saturn" won Best R&B Song at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards in 2025, and was nominated for Best R&B Performance. On November 22, 2024, former labelmate Kendrick Lamar released his sixth studio album, GNX. SZA was prominently featured on the third track, "Luther", contributing vocals on two verses as well as the chorus. She also appeared on the album's closing track, "Gloria", performing the chorus and outro. On November 25, 2024, SZA announced she would release a new album before the end of the year on Kai Cenat's Mafiathon 2 Twitch stream that also featured Lizzo. She also did an interview with British Vogue where she said that she had "projects in development". SZA released the deluxe reissue of SOS, Lana, on December 20, 2024. In addition to "Saturn", it spawned three extra singles, "Drive", "BMF", and "30 for 30".
She made her acting debut in the Issa Rae-produced film One of Them Days (2025), alongside Keke Palmer. In the film, SZA plays Alyssa while Palmer plays Dreux. The two friends must urgently find rent money after one of their boyfriends recklessly spends it all. Elmo declared SZA an "honorary muppet" during an episode filmed for the 55th season of Sesame Street, to be released in 2025. On February 9, 2025, SZA was a featured performer in the Super Bowl LIX halftime show, with the main performer being Lamar. She will embark on the Grand National Tour with Lamar later in 2025.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===

Growing up, SZA was exposed by her family to artists from different genres, which were formative influences for her music. Her mother enjoyed R&B and church music, her father was a fan of jazz and funk musicians like Miles Davis, Billie Holiday, and John Coltrane, and her sister listened to melodic rap and hip hop artists like Tupac Shakur. SZA listens to Ella Fitzgerald for vocal influence and has said that Lauryn Hill is one of her personal influences. SZA has expressed admiration for singer Ashanti, citing her as a major inspiration and someone she has loved since childhood.
SZA also cites Meelah, the Red Hot Chili Peppers, LFO, Macy Gray, Common, Björk, Jamiroquai, and "a lot of Wu, Nas, Mos Def, Hov" as inspirations. Speaking on her influences, SZA said: "[My] personal influences came from dancing with American Ballet Theatre and doing pieces to Björk [music]. That's the only time I had really any outside influence to music. So, the people that I fell in love with on a musical level were always much older. Jamiroquai is just, like, the shit for me." In an interview for Live Nation Entertainment, SZA described the meeting she had with Beyoncé for the writing of the song "Feeling Myself", affirming "Beyoncé might be the most perfect, beautiful being I've ever met in my whole life. She's the most inspirational woman on earth, next to my mother". SZA also spoke about Rihanna, admiring her strong and confident attitude, of someone who does only the music she wants to do, and that if there's anybody that she could imagine singing her words, it would be Rihanna.
SZA is known for naming many of her songs after actresses: "Drew Barrymore" was named after and inspired by the actress; "Jodie" was named after Jodie Foster; and "Go Gina" is a reference to Tisha Campbell's role of Gina on the sitcom Martin (1992–1997). Throughout her second studio album, SOS, SZA incorporates numerous film references in both song titles and lyrics: she named "Kill Bill" after the 2003–2004 film duology; in "Blind", she references Julia Stiles in Save the Last Dance (2001); in the song "Used," SZA makes a reference to Obi-Wan, the Jedi Master from Star Wars; "Smoking on My Ex Pack" contains a comparison between SZA's former romantic partners and Sideshow Bob, a character from The Simpsons who is both a clown and a criminal. "Scorsese Baby Daddy" is a reference to filmmaker and director Martin Scorsese.


=== Music and lyrics ===
SZA's songs are built over "layers of sliced, delayed, and reversed vocals" and contains "twists and mutates", and her vocal style has been described as taking on the "lilt" of a jazz singer. SZA is known as TDE's first woman signee and first singer, which also drew attention during the early stages of her career. According to Rolling Stone's Marissa G. Muller, SZA's vocals alternate between a "vapory husk and a sky-high falsetto".  Jordan Sargent, writing for Pitchfork magazine, labeled SZA's vocals as being "chillwave" and "ethereal".  SZA began writing songs due to being "passionate" about writing, and enjoyed poetry; when writing lyrics, SZA "freestyles" them in order to express whatever comes to her "mind", noting that it does not always make sense to herself. Thematically, SZA's work contains "unravelling lyrics", that touch upon themes of sexuality, nostalgia, and abandonment.
Critics have frequently described SZA as an R&B singer-songwriter, a narrative for which she has expressed disdain consistently since the beginning of her career.  She finds the label both reductive and lazy. For her second studio album, SOS, she wanted to prove her versatility beyond R&B, disillusioned with how Black artists have been historically segregated from White artists through pigeonholing Black artists strictly within R&B music. Other critics have written she combines R&B with rap or pop music in her works, and their attempts to pin her down to genres outside R&B has had SZA confused. She grew up listening to an eclectic combination of pop, rock, jazz, folk, and rap artists and, as such, prefers to be labeled as someone who makes music and nothing more. She said: "when you try to label it, you remove the option for it to be limitless. It diminishes the music." "Genre agnosticism" was how Michael Madden of Consequence described SZA's musical style.


=== Fashion ===
During an interview, SZA said she is less inspired by strictly music, and more inspired by creating art in general; she has looked up to people who were not "typical artists" including her "favorite gymnast, ice-skater, saxophonist, painter, or movie director", continuing to say she was particularly inspired by film director Spike Lee. During an interview with W, SZA spoke on her style influences, saying a large amount of her style inspiration comes from movies, including Wes Anderson films, praising his use of "pantone color palette" and that she "would love to dress like a character from Moonrise Kingdom. Or perhaps Bill Murray in The Life Aquatic." Along with her music, SZA's image has been compared to neo-soul artists Lauryn Hill and Erykah Badu. SZA's hair became a point of interest during the early stages of her career and she discussed it in interviews with Vogue and Harper's Bazaar.  During her performances, SZA tends to wear "free-flowing" clothes that are easy to move around in and wears pajamas or baggy clothing onstage.


== Impact and public image ==

Several critics have noted that SZA's music has cultivated a "girl next door" persona, having been dubbed the girl next door of R&B by Billboard and NME. Singer Baby Rose described SZA as "a radical light", and one of the most influential voices in contemporary music, stating that few artists have shaped the sound of modern R&B as much as SZA. Vogue Australia's Liam Freeman concluded that "it's hard to imagine what an R&B playlist would sound like without her now". Reviewing for Variety, Jem Aswad described SZA as "warm, witty and charismatic" and thought that her speaking voice can be as "honeying as the one she pours lavishly into her music". SZA explained that her experience of exclusion in school while growing up motivated her to prioritize creating an inclusive environment for both herself and her fans.
Many retrospectives have credited SZA's debut album, Ctrl (2017), with influencing the sound of contemporary R&B. In 2023, Sophie Williams of NME highlighted the album's lasting influence, noting that even six years after its release, Ctrl's impact continues to shape a "new generation of young, bright artists". The Australian Broadcasting Corporation's journalist Al Newstead thought that the album redefined genre boundaries through combining classic R&B and neo soul traditions with modern sounds. Many critics argue that Ctrl propelled SZA to mainstream pop stardom.
Many of SZA's unreleased songs have been leaked online, which she has openly criticized, stating, "When people leak my songs, they ruin them". She feels that when a song is leaked, it no longer belongs to her but to the public, describing it as "something unfinished that you decided was ready to be shared". In December 2018, SZA faced her first major leak when a nine-track unreleased album titled Comethru was distributed through a label called Scissor. On the album, SZA was credited as "Sister Solana", while Kendrick Lamar made a guest appearance under the name "King Kenny". In January 2024, SZA warned that she may pursue legal action against those who release her music without permission, stating that she promised to hold them accountable as much as the law allows. In March 2024, SZA addressed a fan on Twitter named Janessa who leaked unreleased images and audio, and later deleted and deactivated her accounts before RCA could take action. SZA's manager, Punch, noted that leaks frequently result in project delays or complete cancellations.
SZA supports a number of causes, including environmental justice and Palestinian rights. In 2019, a fan of SZA diagnosed with lupus, sickle cell disease, and Crohn's disease shared on social media that the artist had contributed financially toward her chemotherapy treatments and used her platform to help find a kidney donor. That same year, SZA launched a merchandise line called Ctrl Fishing Company, which includes apparel featuring phrases such as "Puck Flastic" and "Sustainability Gang", as well as sea animals like blue whales and seahorses. In 2021, SZA partnered with tea brand Tazo and American Forests to address environmental racism—disproportionate environmental harm affecting Black and brown communities. The corps comprised 25 locally hired fellows trained in climate justice advocacy, tree planting, and maintenance. During the SOS Tour concert in Australia on April 16, 2024, she expressed her support for Palestine by holding the country's flag and calling out, "Free Palestine".


== Personal life ==
SZA has been candid about her struggles with mental health and anxiety, describing the music industry as "one of the most stressful, psychosis-inducing industries". She battled suicidal depression following the sudden deaths of three ex-boyfriends in quick succession and found solace through prayer and music, which helped her work toward self-acceptance. SZA is known for keeping her personal life private; however, she dated Canadian rapper and singer Drake in 2009, and was in a relationship with a fashion designer for eleven years, being engaged for five.


== Discography ==


=== Studio albums ===
Ctrl (2017)
SOS (2022; reissued in 2024 as Lana)


== Filmography ==
One of Them Days (2025)


== Tours ==
Headlining

Ctrl the Tour (2017–2018)
SOS Tour (2023–2024)
Co-headlining

The Championship Tour (with Top Dawg Entertainment artists) (2018)
Grand National Tour (with Kendrick Lamar) (2025)
Supporting

Coldplay – Ghost Stories Tour (2014)
Jhené Aiko – Enter the Void Tour (2014)
Jessie J – Sweet Talker Tour (2015)
Bryson Tiller – Set It Off Tour (2017)


== Awards and nominations ==

In her career, SZA has received five Grammy Awards, a Golden Globe nomination, and an Academy Award nomination. She has earned one American Music Award, six Billboard Music Award, four MTV Video Music Awards, six BET Awards, including Best New Artist in 2018 and Album of the Year in 2023. She received the "Rulebreaker Award" and "Women of the Year" at the Billboard Women in Music event in 2018 and 2022 respectively. SZA has also won the Soul Train Music Award for Best New Artist in 2017.
In September 2022, SZA was applauded as one of the rising stars on the Time 100 Next List. At the 2022 Grammy Awards, SZA won Best Pop Duo/Group Performance with Doja Cat for their hit collaboration "Kiss Me More". In 2023, Rolling Stone ranked SZA at number 180 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. At the 2025 Grammy Awards, SZA won Best R&B Song for her single "Saturn".


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Citations ===


== External links ==
 Media related to SZA (singer) at Wikimedia Commons
SZA at AllMusic