Ne Zha 2 (Chinese: 哪吒之魔童闹海; pinyin: Nézhā zhī Mótóng Nàohǎi; also known as 哪吒2; Nézhā Èr) is a 2025 Chinese animated feature film, written and directed by Jiaozi. It is the sequel to the 2019 film Ne Zha. The film and its character prototypes are loosely based on the 16th-century Chinese novel Investiture of the Gods (Fengshen Yanyi).  
Ne Zha 2 was released in theaters in China on 29 January 2025 (the Chinese New Year Day) in standard 2D and 3D, IMAX, CINITY and CINITY LED, CGS, Dolby Cinema, 4DX, and other formats. Having grossed US$1.2 billion on a US$80 million budget, it is currently the highest-grossing film of 2025, the highest-grossing film in China, and the highest grossing non-English language film of all time. On the 11th day of its release, Ne Zha 2 became the highest grossing film in a single territory, surpassing the $936 million grossed by Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015) in North America, which itself had taken 165 days to reach that mark.
Ne Zha and Ne Zha 2, along with Jiang Ziya, are part of Enlight Pictures' Fengshen Universe.


== Plot ==
After Nezha and Ao Bing sacrifice themselves using the Chaos Pearl's energy, their bodies are destroyed, while their souls live on; Taiyi Zhenren attempts to use the seven-colored lotus to reshape their bodies, but encounters numerous difficulties. Meanwhile, Shen Gongbao releases the Four Dragon Kings, long-imprisoned in the deep sea, with Ao Guang, the Dragon King of the East Sea, declaring that nothing would be left in Chentangguan; Nezha has to battle them to defend his home.


== Production ==
Shortly after the release of Ne Zha (2019), the production team intended to develop a sequel. Director Jiaozi confirmed that this is indeed the case, and that it would depend on the first film's box office performance. After the success of Ne Zha, the sequel was put into production. The sequel is called "Nezha: The Demon Boy Havoc in the Sea", or Ne Zha 2 in English, and the cost increased to 600 million yuan, breaking the record of Deep Sea (2023), to become China's most expensive animated film.
Ne Zha and Ne Zha 2 both took five years to produce. More than 4,000 people participated in the animation of this film, more than double the 1,600 people in the first film. Producer Liu Wenzhang said that the number of characters in this film is three times that of the previous film. The previous film had more than 1,800 shots, while this film has more than 2,400 shots, including more than 1,900 special effects shots.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Ne Zha 2 has received generally positive reviews. Douban Movies scored the film 8.5/10, and the film also had an average rating of 9.7 out of 10 on Maoyan and 9.8 out of 10 on Taopiaopiao. Red Star News praised its special effects, script, and concept, and said that the film "uses a solid script and accurate expression of values, proving that 'respect for the audience' is the real box office password." Shangguan News praised the film for continuing the style and rhythm of the previous film, and the further improvement of the battle and special effects scenes, but criticized the lack of suspense in the plot. Feng Ji, the founder of Game Science, also reviewed it positively.


=== Box office ===
In just three days after its release in China, the film's box office reached 1.1 billion yuan, which became the first movie to reach 1 billion yuan in box office during the Spring Festival in 2025. On the fourth day of release, the box office exceeded 2 billion yuan. On the fifth day of release, it exceeded 3 billion yuan. It exceeded 4 billion yuan on only the sixth day of release, entering the top ten in film history. At the same time, it broke the record for the fastest time to break 4 billion yuan set by Detective Chinatown 3 in 2021 (it took 9 days and 9 hours). The box office exceeded 5 billion on the eighth day of release, breaking the record of breaking 5 billion set by The Battle at Lake Changjin, the box office champion in mainland China in 2021 (it took 19 days and 9 hours), and surpassed the total box office of the first Ne Zha film, becoming the highest grossing animated film in mainland China. The Ne Zha film series also became the second film series to exceed 10 billion with just two movies, and the box office exceeded 6 billion on the ninth day of release.
After the film was released, its box office continued to rise due to its excellent word of mouth. Many took to social media to voice that it was hard to even get a ticket, and many netizens took to the producers' social media to call for more showings to be scheduled to meet the audience's viewing needs. In some places, there were even rare phenomena such as midnight showings being completely full. Due to the film's box office performance, the film's producer and distributor, Enlight Media, saw its shares rise by the daily limit after the Spring Festival.
As of February 8, 2025, the box office has exceeded 7.2 billion yuan, ranking first in the Spring Festival period, surpassing Wolf Warrior 2 (2017) and The Battle at Lake Changjin (2021), becoming the first in the total box office of Chinese movies. On February 8, the box office exceeded 7 billion yuan (965 million U.S. dollars), becoming the 63rd film in the history of world movies to break the 7 billion yuan record, and the first non-Hollywood film to break the 7 billion mark. It also surpassed the single territory box office record ($936.7 million) created by Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), just 11 days into its release.


=== Merchandise ===
Due to the film's success, official merchandises and toys associated with the film also became best-selling across stores in China. It was reported that many products are completely sold out.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Ne Zha 2 at IMDb
Ne Zha 2 at Rotten Tomatoes
Ne Zha 2 at Douban (in Chinese)