Alix Ashley Earle (born December 16, 2000) is an American social media personality on the video-sharing platform TikTok. With over six million followers on social media, she has been called TikTok's "It girl" and "hot best friend" from the popularity of her "Get Ready With Me" confessional videos, in which she openly shares details of her personal life. Her ability to drive sales for the brands she promotes on her accounts has been dubbed the "Alix Earle effect".


== Early life and education ==
Earle was born December 16, 2000, in Monmouth County, New Jersey, the oldest of five children, to Thomas "TJ" Earle, a construction magnate in Wall Township, New Jersey, and Alisa Maniaci, who is of Italian descent. Her parents met each other at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Florida.
In July 2008, the New York Post reported that Earle's father Thomas was having an affair with Ashley Alexandra Dupré, an escort best known for her involvement in a political sex scandal that resulted in the resignation of one of her clients, Elliot Spitzer, then governor of New York. Earle's parents later divorced in 2013, and in October of that year her father married Dupré.
Earle is the oldest of five siblings. She has one biological sister, Ashtin Earle. From her father’s second marriage to Ashley Dupré, Alix has three half-siblings: Izabel, Penelope, and Thomas James Earle II.
In 2019, Earle graduated from Red Bank Catholic High School in Red Bank, New Jersey.
She attended the University of Miami, where she graduated in May 2023 from the Miami Herbert Business School with a degree in marketing. In August 2023, Earle endowed the Alix Earle Scholarship for students at the business school.


== Career ==


=== Social media ===
In February 2020 as a University of Miami freshman, Earle began posting on TikTok. Her first video depicted her and her friends showing off their outfits, which were made of trash bags. In her videos, Earle frequently refers to herself in the third person as "Big Al".
In a 2023 interview on The Howard Stern Show, Earle stated that she initially attempted to fulfill an idealized, perfect persona. "When I started out, I had no idea. I was trying to be picture perfect. I thought that was the way to go.": 1:00 
Earle's growth on TikTok accelerated in the summer of 2022, when she was affected by acne stemming from an excessive facial cyst. Her manager informed her that she had to post a sponsored video on her TikTok. Due to her acne, she initially refused, but later decided that she could use her platform to help others struggling with the same issue. Earle later described the viewer response as positive and supportive.
After her acne video, Earle began posting "Get Ready With Me" (GRWM) videos showcasing her makeup routine while discussing her daily life. The move proved to be popular with viewers, and Earle accumulated two million new followers on TikTok by the end of 2022.


=== "Alix Earle effect" ===
Earle's popularity and fan loyalty often causes the brands she promotes to sell out very fast, which has been dubbed the "Alix Earle effect". According to Ubiquitous, a marketing company, one of Earle's videos can increase searches for a product by as much as 100% in one day. Earle earns as much as $40,000-$70,000 for each sponsored video.
The phrase "he/she is my Alix Earle" has also gained minor popularity on TikTok. The phrase implies that the subject of the comment has a similar influential effect on the commenter as Earle may have on others.


=== Podcast and other ventures ===
In August 2023, Earle was announced as one of the first two content partners of Alexandra Cooper's The Unwell Network, a talent network. The Unwell Network produces Earle's podcast, "Hot Mess with Alix Earle." "Hot Mess with Alix Earle” briefly unseated "The Joe Rogan Experience" from the top spot of Spotify's podcast charts, where it had sat uncontested for the previous two years.
Earle was named in the Forbes 30 Under 30 list for 2023.
In June 2024, Earle appeared in the music video for the single "Girls" by Australian artist The Kid Laroi.


== Personal life ==
Earle began dating San Diego Padres player Tyler Wade in December 2022, and ended the relationship three months later. Earle later announced in a TikTok that the relationship ended because Wade did not support her career.
In November 2023, Earle confirmed her relationship with Braxton Berrios, a wide receiver with the Miami Dolphins. Earle revealed during an episode of her "Hot Mess" podcast in December 2023 that she met Braxton Berrios at a Miami party in February 2023. The confirmation came during a live recording of the "Call Her Daddy" podcast in Chicago. In February 2024, Earle was invited to the 13th annual NFL Honors in Las Vegas to be Berrios's date.
In October 2023, Earle spoke publicly about her struggles with an eating disorder and body dysmorphia during high school.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Alix Earle at Wikimedia Commons