Russell Thurlow Vought (IPA:  VOHT, born March 26, 1976) is an American political analyst who has been the director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) since February 2025. He was in the same position from July 2020 to January 2021.  
A self-described Christian nationalist, in 2021 Vought founded the Center for Renewing America, an organization that opposes critical race theory and advocates for the idea of America as a "nation under God". He has also played a significant role in Project 2025, an initiative led by the Heritage Foundation that aims to advance conservative, right-wing policies and reshape the federal government. In May 2024, he was appointed Policy Director of the Republican National Committee's platform committee. 
In November 2024, President-elect Donald Trump announced that he would renominate Vought as director of the OMB for his second term as president. He was confirmed by the United States Senate to the office on February 6, 2025, by a vote of 53–47.


== Early life and career ==
Vought was born to Thurlow Bunyea Vought, an electrician and U.S. Marine Corps veteran and Margaret Flowers Vought, an elementary school teacher. He earned a BA from Wheaton College in Wheaton, Illinois and a JD from the George Washington University Law School.
Vought worked for Heritage Action, the lobbying arm of the Heritage Foundation. He was the executive director and budget director of the Republican Study Committee, the policy director for the Republican Conference of the United States House of Representatives, and a legislative assistant for U.S. Senator Phil Gramm.


== First Trump administration ==


=== Office of Management and Budget ===


==== Deputy OMB Director ====
In April 2017, President Donald Trump nominated Vought to be Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). He was confirmed by the Senate on February 28, 2018, in a 50–49 vote. Vice President Mike Pence cast the tie-breaking vote.
During the confirmation hearings, Senator Bernie Sanders questioned Vought about a statement that "Muslims do not simply have a deficient theology. They do not know God because they have rejected Jesus Christ his Son, and they stand condemned." The Atlantic magazine's then staff reporter Emma Green said the questioning "flirted with the boundaries of this rule" and various Christian organizations denounced Sanders's questioning as a violation of the No Religious Test Clause.
In 2019, Vought was one of nine government officials who defied a subpoena to testify before Congress in relation to the Trump–Ukraine scandal and the administration's decision to freeze military aid to Ukraine. The decision to freeze aid to Ukraine had led Democrats to launch the first impeachment of Donald Trump.


==== OMB director ====

On January 2, 2019, when OMB director Mick Mulvaney became acting White House chief of staff, Vought became the acting OMB director, though Mulvaney continued to hold the director position. On March 18, 2020, Trump announced his intent to nominate him to be OMB Director. Vought was confirmed by the Senate on July 20, 2020, by a vote of 51–45, and was sworn in two days later.
In May 2020, Vought broke the OMB's long-standing practice of publishing updated economic forecasts, citing disruption caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
On September 4, 2020, Vought, at Trump's direction, published an OMB memo instructing federal agencies to stop all training on "critical race theory" or "white privilege", along with "any other training or propaganda effort that teaches or suggests either (1) that the United States is an inherently racist or evil country or (2) that any race or ethnicity is inherently racist or evil". The memo further directed that agencies begin to identify legal avenues to cancel contracts or otherwise divert the "millions of taxpayer dollars" being spent on such training, which it said "engenders division and resentment within the federal workforce."


==== 2020 election ====
After Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential election, he and his transition team accused Vought of hindering the presidential transition by refusing to allow incoming Biden officials to meet with OMB staff. Typically, career OMB staff would provide an incoming administration with cost estimates and details on existing programs. 
Vought defended his actions, stating that OMB had provided funding for the transition and that there had been more than 45 meetings with Biden officials but that "OMB staff are working on this administration's policies and will do so until this administration's final day in office".


== Post-administration ==


=== Center for Renewing America ===
In January 2021, Vought started an organization called the Center for Renewing America, which is focused on "combating critical race theory," and an affiliated issue advocacy group called American Restoration Action. The mission of the groups is to "renew a consensus of America as a nation under God". According to Axios, the groups "will provide the ideological ammunition to sustain Trump's political movement after his departure from the White House."
In April 2021, The Washington Post fact-checker rated Vought's statement that only 5 to 7 percent of the Biden administration's $2.3 trillion infrastructure plan would go to "actual roads and bridges and ports and things that you and I would say is real infrastructure" as "Three Pinocchios" out of four.
On June 8, 2021, Citizens for Renewing America (CRA), the advocacy arm of Center for American Restoration, released a guide to "combatting critical race theory." Vought told Fox News the 33-page handbook is "a crash course in CRT, a 'one-stop shopping' for parents trying to hold their school board members accountable." 
On June 22, 2022, Vought confirmed that federal agents conducted a search of the home of his organization's director of litigation, Jeffrey Clark, a former U.S. Department of Justice official who participated in efforts to challenge the results of the 2020 presidential election.
In February 2023, CRA published a paper arguing for a "dormant NATO, wherein Europe is the primary security provider of the European front."
CRA is a member of the advisory board of Project 2025, a collection of conservative and right-wing policy proposals from the Heritage Foundation to reshape the United States federal government and consolidate executive power should the Republican nominee win the 2024 presidential election.
In a note written in November 20, 2024, the CRA Staff suggests to weaponize impoundments: "Resuscitation of the President’s impoundment authority will serve as a critical tool to curb excessive spending, reduce inflation, and dismantle the woke and weaponized bureaucracy targeting American citizens." 


=== Project 2025 ===

Vought plays a major role in Project 2025, a collection of conservative and right-wing policy proposals from the Heritage Foundation to reshape the United States federal government and consolidate executive power should the Republican Party candidate win the 2024 presidential election. It proposes reclassifying tens of thousands of merit-based federal civil service workers as political appointees in order to replace them with loyalists more willing to enable the next Republican president's policies. It seeks to infuse the government and society with Christian values. 
In October 2024, ProPublica reported that Vought's proposals include plans to reshape government by using military force against protesters if deemed necessary, defunding agencies like the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to reduce federal influence, and casting civil servants as obstructive to conservative agendas. His CRA aims to enact an aggressive policy approach, cutting bureaucracy and focusing on Trump-aligned, conservative governance.
In July, 2024, Vought spoke candidly to journalists he mistook for conservative donors. In the two-hour interview he revealed details of his plan to take control over the government through presidential power. He summed up his core belief as Christian Nationism. 


=== Other ===
Vought was named policy director of the Republican National Committee platform committee in May 2024.


== Second Trump administration ==


=== Nomination and confirmation ===
In November 2024, president-elect Trump announced that he would renominate Vought as director of the OMB for his second term as president. Vought appeared before the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs on January 15, 2025. During the hearing, Vought did not commit to spend all the money assigned by the Congress to the federal government. The committee advanced his nomination in an 8–7 vote on January 20. He later appeared before the Senate Budget Committee on January 22. The committee approved his nomination in an 11–0 vote, with all 9 Democrats and 1 Independent boycotting the vote due to the recent federal spending freeze. The Senate voted 53–47 on February 6 to approve his nomination.


=== Tenure ===
Upon taking office the next day, Vought was also installed as acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.


== Political and religious positions ==
Vought graduated from the evangelical Christian Wheaton College and describes himself as a Christian nationalist. He seeks to infuse the government and society with elements of Christianity, saying he has "a commitment to an institutional separation between church and state, but not the separation of Christianity from its influence on government and society," according to The Washington Post. In a secretly recorded meeting in 2024, Vought said that elected leaders should discuss whether to prioritize Christian immigrants over those of other religions. Vought supports a total ban on abortion. He has called the Democratic Party "increasingly evil" for supporting secularism.
Vought advocates for what he calls "radical constitutionalism" to reverse a current "post-Constitutional time" which he asserts has been the result of decades of corruption of laws and institutions by the political left. He characterizes the federal bureaucracy as "woke and weaponized" and advocates replacing it with "radical constitutionalists". Vought supports expanding presidential authority, proposing the use of the military for domestic law enforcement and revisiting the president's ability to withhold congressionally-appropriated funds, a practice Congress banned in 1974. Vought proposes to "gut the FBI" and end the tradition of political independence of the U.S. Justice Department.


== Personal life ==
Vought was formerly married to Mary Grace Vought, with whom he had two daughters. Mary filed for divorce on August 4, 2023, and their divorce was finalized on August 30 in Arlington County, Virginia.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Russell Vought at Wikimedia Commons

Appearances on C-SPAN