Miriam Adelson (née Farbstein; born 10 October 1945) is an Israeli-American physician, businesswoman, and political donor.
She was married to Sheldon Adelson, founder of the Las Vegas Sands casino company and the Israel Hayom newspaper, from 1991 until his death in 2021. They were philanthropists through the Adelson Foundation, giving hundreds of millions of dollars to Jewish and Israel causes. Miriam Adelson is one of the largest supporters of Donald Trump, who awarded her the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2018. Adelson has been a major donor to Trump's presidential campaigns, as well as his 2017 presidential inauguration and his legal defense fund against the Mueller investigation into Russian interference.
After her husband's death, Miriam became the owner of the Las Vegas Sands. She is the current publisher of Israel Hayom and, with her family, owns the Las Vegas Review-Journal. Adelson is also the majority owner of the Dallas Mavericks basketball team with her son-in-law Patrick Dumont. As of 2024, according to Forbes, she has an estimated net worth of $32 billion, making her the 53rd-richest person as well as the richest Israeli in the world, and is the eighth-richest woman in America.


== Early life and medical career ==
Adelson was born Miriam Farbstein in Tel Aviv, Mandatory Palestine, in 1945 to parents who fled Poland before the Holocaust. Her father was a prominent member of Mapam, a left-wing political party in Israel. In the 1950s, her family settled in Haifa, where Adelson's father owned and operated several movie theaters. 
She attended the Hebrew Reali School for 12 years. She served mandatory army service as a medical officer at Ness Ziona. After earning a Bachelor of Science in microbiology and genetics from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, she earned a medical degree, graduating magna cum laude from Tel Aviv University Faculty of Medicine.
She became a physician and, eventually, the chief internist in an emergency room at Tel Aviv's Rokach (Hadassah) Hospital. After divorcing her first husband, she went to Rockefeller University in 1986 as an associate physician specializing in drug addiction. There, she was mentored by, and subsequently collaborated for two decades with, Mary Jeanne Kreek, who was known for the development of methadone therapy for heroin addiction. 
In 1993, Adelson founded a substance abuse center and research clinic. She and her husband opened the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Research Clinic in Las Vegas seven years later. She has published numerous scientific papers on the topic of drug addiction during her career and has been a guest investigator at Rockefeller University.


== Philanthropy ==
The Adelson family became philanthropists, primarily through the Adelson Foundation, and political megadonors. The couple was presented with the Woodrow Wilson Award for Corporate Citizenship by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars of the Smithsonian Institution in 2008.
In July 2024, Adelson donated $3 million to Israeli volunteer emergency medical services organization United Hatzalah. With the funds, the organization would purchase 76 motorcycles and ambulances and two emergency vehicles.
In 2013, Adelson received honorary citizenship of Jerusalem. She served as one of the finance vice-chairs for the inauguration of Donald Trump. She was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Donald Trump in 2018. Speaking on her Medal of Freedom at an event in August 2024, Trump said, "it’s actually much better because everyone gets the Congressional Medal of Honor, they're soldiers. They’re either in very bad shape because they’ve been hit so many times by bullets or they’re dead. She gets it, and she’s a healthy, beautiful woman, and they’re rated equal."


== Business ventures ==
In 2018, Adelson was named the publisher of Israel Hayom, the most widely read newspaper in Israel, a position she still holds. She is also a voting member on the board of trustees at the University of Southern California.  After Sheldon Adelson died in 2021, she became the owner of casino company Las Vegas Sands, which he had founded. She remains the majority owner of Las Vegas Sands, which she runs along with her family. 
The NBA Board of Governors unanimously approved the sale of the controlling ownership interest of the Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association to Adelson and her son-in-law Patrick Dumont on December 27, 2023. Dumont became the Mavericks' governor and representative to the NBA Board of Governors. The Adelson-Dumont families' would own 69% of the team and previous controlling owner Mark Cuban's share was reduced to 27%. 


== Political views and activity ==

Adelson is a prolific donor in American politics, mostly to causes affiliated with the Republican Party. She was the top female donor in the 2012 United States elections, contributing as much as the next 15 female donors combined. According to Politico, she reportedly donated $46 million in the 2012 elections.
Since buying a majority stake in the Dallas Mavericks, Adelson has been advocating for greater legalization of gambling in Texas, in order to build a casino in the state.


=== Support for Israel ===
Adelson has stated the "top issue in the Jewish community is the survival of the Jewish people." Rabbi Shmuley Boteach described her as "arguably the proudest Jew I have met." A strong supporter of Israel, she has said that her heart is in that country and that she got "stuck" in America after meeting her husband. She is credited with influencing his political views on Israel, who was "inspired by [her] Zionism, and from there began a public and philanthropic campaign unique in our generation". Adelson is a financial supporter of the Zionist Organization of America, the Yad Vashem Holocaust museum and memorial in Jerusalem, and various U.S. groups that fundraise for the Israeli military.
In response to the October 7, 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel, Adelson published an Op-Ed in Forbes Israel, entitled "Dead to Us". Referring to a wave of pro-Palestinian protests occurring across various western cities and countries, Adelson stated that "Those ghastly gatherings of radical Muslim and Black Lives Matter activists, ultra-progressives and career agitators were nothing short of street parties. These people are not our critics. They are our enemies, the ideological enablers in the West of those who would go to any length to eradicate us from the Middle East. And, as such, they should be dead to us".


=== Support for Donald Trump ===
After 2016, she was known for her support for Donald Trump. She and her husband were the largest donors of Trump throughout his presidency; they provided the largest donation to his 2016 campaign, his presidential inauguration, his defense fund against the Mueller investigation into Russian interference and the 2020 campaign.
She has written that Trump "should enjoy sweeping support" among U.S. Jews and Israelis, and that Trump deserves a "Book of Trump" in the Bible due to his support for Israel. She pushed for the pardon of Aviem Sella who spied against America. 
Adelson wrote that Trump represents "kinship, friendship, courage, the triumph of truth" and that "Israelis and proud Jews owe Donald Trump our gratitude."
Trump met with Adelson in February 2024, and she supported Trump in the 2024 United States presidential election. In May 2024, Politico reported that Adelson will contribute $90 million to a Super PAC supporting Trump. At this time the Biden’s campaign account had $84 million cash, and Trump's had $49 million (not accounting for PAC dollars). 
Miriam Adelson sought support from candidate Trump for Israel's annexation of the West Bank, pledging more than $100 million to Trump’s campaign in exchange for U.S. recognition of Israel’s sovereignty over the region.


== Personal life ==
She married Ariel Ochshorn, also a physician, with whom she had two children. The couple were divorced by 1986. She met Sheldon Adelson in 1989, while at Rockefeller University, and they married in 1991. The Adelsons had two sons, Adam and Matan. Matan has owned Hapoel Jerusalem B.C. since 2023. Sheldon Adelson died in 2021.
Since the death of her husband, Miriam Adelson has been ranked as one of the wealthiest people in the world. Forbes estimated her net worth at $38.2 billion in 2021, $27.5 billion in 2022, and $35 billion in 2023. In 2024, Adelson's net worth was estimated at $32 billion, making her the richest Israeli and the 53rd-richest person in the world as well as the richest person in the state of Nevada. Forbes has also listed Adelson among the ten richest women in America in 2023 and 2024, ranking her fifth and eighth, respectively. According to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index, as of July 2024, Adelson had a net worth of $31.7 billion, which it increased to $37.5 billion four months later.


== Awards and recognition ==
 Presidential Medal of Freedom, awarded by President Donald Trump (2018)
Doctor Honoris Causa by Tel Aviv University (2007)
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars' Woodrow Wilson Award for Corporate Citizenship


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Binkley, Christina (7 January 2019). "Meet Dr Miriam Adelson: the record-breaking Republican donor driving Trump's Israel policy". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 15 April 2020.