The Pirus are a subset of the larger Bloods gang alliance, an organized crime group in the United States.


== Etymology ==
The name "Piru" is derived from the Piru Street Boys, a gang which was founded in 1969 by Sylvester Scott and Vincent Owens in Compton. The Piru Street Boys are considered the forerunners to the Bloods, which is why the terms "Piru" and "Blood" are often used interchangeably. However, this interchangeable use of the terms is inaccurate, as many non-Piru gangs such as the Denver Lanes and Brims were also instrumental in the formation of the Bloods.
Furthermore, the Pirus are an alliance of street gangs within the larger Bloods alliance, meaning that not all Bloods sets will identify as "Pirus".


== History ==
In 1969, a gang called the Piru Street Boys was founded by Sylvester Scott and Vincent Owens. According to some sources, the Piru Street Boys were initially associated with the Crips, but later had a falling-out. However, other sources dispute any alliance, claiming that the Piru Street Boys were victimised by the Crips. Nevertheless, by the early 1970s, the Piru Street Boys formed an alliance with other smaller street gangs such as the Brims, Bishops and Denver Lanes, which also opposed the Crips. This alliance became known as the Bloods, as the members of this alliance called each other "blood".
Eventually, more Piru sets would form. There are 15 known Piru sets within the Greater Los Angeles area. Piru sets have fought against each other. For example, the Mob Piru and Fruit Town Piru developed a rivalry by the late 1990s, which resulted in the murders of several Mob Pirus associated with Death Row Records. 


== Piru sets ==
Cedar Block Piru
Elm Street Piru
Fruit Town Piru
Lueders Park Piru
Mob Piru
Tree Top Piru


== In popular culture ==

The song "Piru Love" from Bangin' on Wax (1993) by Bloods & Crips makes references to various Piru sets, including Holly Hood, Elm Street and Lueders Park.
The song "M.A.A.D City" from good kid, m.A.A.d city (2012) by Kendrick Lamar makes references to the Bloods, being Pirus particularly with the line "If Pirus and Crips, all got along" in the song.
In the song "Strange Clouds" from Strange Clouds (2012) by B.o.B. featuring Lil Wayne, Lil Wayne references the Piru: "Piru, gangsters, outlaws" at the end of his verse.
In the song "Let The Beat Build" from Tha Carter III (2008) by Lil Wayne, Lil Wayne references the Piru: "I can buy you, but I wouldn't try you, feed you to Piru".


== See also ==
African-American organized crime
Gangs in Los Angeles
List of California street gangs


== References ==