Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man is an American animated television series created by Jeff Trammell for the streaming service Disney+, based on the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man. It is the 12th television series in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) from Marvel Studios and is produced by Marvel Studios Animation. The series explores Peter Parker's origin story and early days as Spider-Man, and is set in an alternate timeline from the main films and television series of the MCU where Norman Osborn becomes Peter's mentor instead of Tony Stark. Trammell serves as showrunner and head writer, with Mel Zwyer as supervising director.
Hudson Thames voices Peter Parker / Spider-Man, reprising his role from the Marvel Studios animated series What If...? (2021–2024), with Kari Wahlgren, Grace Song, Eugene Byrd, Zeno Robinson, Colman Domingo, and Hugh Dancy also starring. Disney+ announced the series as Spider-Man: Freshman Year in November 2021, with Trammell attached. It was originally intended to be set in the main MCU continuity but the creative team found this too restrictive and decided to move it to an alternate timeline, allowing the series to explore familiar ideas and characters in new ways. It was retitled Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man by December 2023. The 3D cel-shaded animation pays homage to the art style of early The Amazing Spider-Man comic books by Steve Ditko and John Romita Sr., with animation provided by Polygon Pictures and CGCG, Inc.
The first season of Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man premiered with its first two episodes on Disney+ on January 29, 2025, with the remaining episodes being released in groups until February 19, as part of Phase Five of the MCU. A second and third season are in development.


== Premise ==
Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man explores Peter Parker's origin story and early days using the Spider-Man persona. The series is set in an alternate timeline within the multiverse where Norman Osborn becomes Peter's mentor instead of Tony Stark, as happens in the Marvel Cinematic Universe's (MCU) main timeline.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Hudson Thames as Peter Parker / Spider-Man:A 15-year-old freshman at Rockford T. Bales High School who gains spider-like abilities after being bitten by a spider. Head writer and showrunner Jeff Trammell enjoyed exploring Peter's mindset, how he is impacted by the different characters around him, and the effect that has on his growth as Spider-Man.
Kari Wahlgren as May Parker: Peter's widowed aunt
Wahlgren also voices Roxanna Volkov, a Russian criminal
Grace Song as Nico Minoru: Peter's classmate and best friend
Eugene Byrd as Lonnie Lincoln / Tombstone:Peter's classmate and captain of the Bales football team who reluctantly joins the 110th Street gang to protect his brother, leading him down a dark path
Zeno Robinson as Harry Osborn:Norman's son who befriends Peter and provides him support as Spider-Man's "dude at the desk", referencing the "guy in the chair" terminology that is used in the Marvel Cinematic Universe's (MCU) main timeline.
Colman Domingo as Norman Osborn:The CEO of Oscorp, Harry's father, and Peter's mentor. Trammell noted that Norman is not a hero like Tony Stark / Iron Man—Peter's mentor in the MCU's main timeline—and his methods "may not turn out in everyone's best interest".
Hugh Dancy as Otto Octavius: A scientist who sells his high-tech weaponry and equipment to various criminals


=== Recurring ===
Cathy Ang as Pearl Pangan: Peter's classmate and childhood crush who is dating Lonnie
Leilani Barrett as Big Donovan: The leader of the 110th Street Gang


=== Guest ===
Kellen Goff as
A symbiotic alien that attacks Midtown High School
Vincent Patilio: Octavius's assistant
Robin Atkin Downes as Dr. Stephen Strange: A neurosurgeon who became a Master of the Mystic Arts following a career-ending car accident
Roger Craig Smith as
Phil Grayfield: The coach of the Bales football team
James Sanders / Speed Demon: Maria Vasquez's lover and partner in crime who possesses high-tech boots that give him superhuman speed
Dmitri Smerdyakov: A Russian criminal
Anjali Kunapaneni as Jeanne Foucault: An Oscorp intern
Erica Luttrell as Asha: An Oscorp intern who hails from Wakanda
Aleks Le as Amadeus Cho: An Oscorp intern
Paul F. Tompkins as Bentley Wittman: An abusive Oscorp scientist who oversees the interns
Zehra Fazal as Carla Connors: An Oscorp scientist who works with Peter during his internship
Jake Green as Butane: An arsonist equipped with high-tech weaponry
Anairis Quiñones as
Maria Vasquez: James Sanders's lover and partner in crime who uses a pair of high-tech gauntlets capable of generating energy blades
Carmilla Black: The second-in-command of the Scorpions gang
Ettore Ewen as Bulldozer: A member of the 110th Street Gang
Travis Willingham as
Mikhail Sytsevich: A Russian criminal
Thaddeus "Thunderbolt" Ross
Sarah Natochenny as Mila Masaryk / Unicorn: A Russian criminal equipped with a high-tech helmet that shoots lasers
Jonathan Medina as Mac Gargan: The leader of the Scorpions gang
Charlie Cox as Matt Murdock / Daredevil: A blind lawyer with superhuman senses from Hell's Kitchen who leads a double life as a masked vigilante
Vincent D'Onofrio as Wilson Fisk / Kingpin: A powerful businessman and crime lord
Mick Wingert as Tony Stark / Iron Man
Additionally, the character White Rabbit is confirmed to be appearing in the series.


== Episodes ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
By June 2021, Marvel Studios Animation was developing a slate of at least three more series in addition to their Disney+ series What If...? (2021–2024). The next month, these were said to be in various stages of development and were not expected to debut until at least 2023. Spider-Man: Freshman Year was announced during a Disney+ Day event in November 2021, with Jeff Trammell serving as head writer. Trammell was asked to develop the series after pitching a different animated project to Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige and animation head Brad Winderbaum. Mel Zwyer served as supervising director, with Stu Livingston as an episodic director. Marvel Studios' Feige, Louis D'Esposito, Winderbaum, and Dana Vasquez-Eberhardt were executive producers alongside Trammell.
During Marvel Studios Animation's panel at San Diego Comic-Con in July 2022, Spider-Man: Freshman Year and the other projects discussed were referred to as being part of the "Marvel Animated Multiverse". A second season was announced at the panel with the title Spider-Man: Sophomore Year. The series was retitled Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man by December 2023. In January 2025, Trammell said the series was not limited to covering one school year per season, and Winderbaum said a third season had been green-lit. Trammell was listed as both showrunner and head writer by Marvel.com.


=== Writing ===
The series depicts the origin story of Peter Parker / Spider-Man, which was never explored in detail in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) films; Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige stated in 2015 that they decided to not retell the character's origin in Captain America: Civil War (2016), which was the character's first MCU appearance, since there had already been two versions depicted in the Spider-Man films directed by Sam Raimi (2002–2007) and Marc Webb (2012–2014) and the studio decided to "take it for granted that people know that". The series was originally planned to be set within the MCU's "Sacred Timeline" before the events of Civil War, but the creative team found this to be too restrictive regarding which characters and comic book elements could be included. They decided to move the series to an alternate timeline, taking advantage of the MCU's multiverse concept: the story begins similarly to Civil War but depicts Norman Osborn becoming Peter's mentor instead of Tony Stark, which leads to Peter meeting other unexpected characters.
Trammell said the series would explore Peter's identity pre-Spider-Man and how his superhero career began. The creative team took inspiration from early The Amazing Spider-Man comic books by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko, as well as previous Spider-Man animated series. Trammell took specific inspiration from the way characters were developed in The Spectacular Spider-Man (2008–09). He wanted to use the series to approach familiar ideas and characters in new ways, such as Norman Osborn's role as Peter's mentor. Spider-Man's origin story in Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man sees Peter get bit by a spider falling out of a portal created by Dr. Stephen Strange as he is fighting a symbiotic alien, connecting his origin to magic rather than science as in the comics. Winderbaum said the series was "so essentially Spider-Man" because it features Peter trying to juggle high school, caring for his aunt May, and being a superhero. He said the large ensemble of characters allowed for interesting relationships and stakes, and an emphasis on the "neighborhood" from the series' title by featuring supporting characters in prominent roles; Winderbaum compared this to Trammell's work on the animated series Craig of the Creek (2018–2025). Several characters not usually associated with Spider-Man are included in the series, including Nico Minoru in the role of Peter's best friend, as well as Jeanne Foucault and Amadeus Cho. Trammell considered including a young Jessica Jones as one of Peter's classmates.
Writers for the first season included Tremmell, Charlie Neuner, Raven Kone, and Halima Lucas. By January 2025, the second season scripts had been written, with Winderbaum preparing at that time to hear Trammell's pitch for the third season. Given the series' renewal for three seasons, Winderbaum noted that Trammell had been building a narrative through-line for the series since the first season.


=== Casting and voice recording ===
Charlie Cox was revealed to be reprising his role as Matt Murdock / Daredevil from previous MCU media in July 2022, while Paul F. Tompkins was cast as Bentley Wittman. Cox recorded his lines in 2021 during breaks in filming the live-action MCU series She-Hulk: Attorney at Law (2022). In September 2023, a United States Copyright Office filing for the series revealed that Hudson Thames was voicing Peter Parker / Spider-Man, reprising his role from the first season of What If...? (2021), with Eugene Byrd as Lonnie Lincoln, Grace Song as Nico Minoru, Hugh Dancy as Otto Octavius, Kari Wahlgren as May Parker, and Zeno Robinson as Harry Osborn. The creative team were struggling to settle on an actor they felt could live up to Norman Osborn's reputation when Zwyer suggested casting Colman Domingo. Trammell thought that was a "genius idea" and they immediately approached the actor, who was "super excited" to take on the role. Domingo's casting was announced in August 2024.
In December 2024, Vincent D'Onofrio was revealed to be reprising his role as Wilson Fisk / Kingpin from previous MCU media, with Cathy Ang as the voice of Pearl Pangan. Ahead of the series' premiere in January 2025, more actors were revealed to have been cast in the series: Robin Atkin Downes as Dr. Stephen Strange; Anjali Kunapaneni as Jeanne Foucault; Erica Luttrell as Asha; Aleks Le as Amadeus Cho; Zehra Fazal as Carla Connors; Jake Green as Butane; Mick Wingert as Tony Stark / Iron Man, reprising his role from What If...?; Roger Craig Smith as James Sanders / Speed Demon and Dmitri Smerdyakov; Anairis Quiñones as Maria Vasquez and Carmilla Black; Travis Willingham as Mikhail Sytsevich and Thaddeus "Thunderbolt" Ross; Sarah Natochenny as Mila Masaryk / Unicorn; Leilani Barrett as Big Donovan; and Jonathan Medina as Mac Gargan. Additionally, former wrestler Ettore "Big E" Ewen was revealed to be part of the cast. He began work on the first season in 2022, and was working on the second season by January 2025.


=== Animation and design ===
Because Marvel Studios Animation does not have a "house style", the creative team were free to develop an animation style that differed from previous series What If...? and X-Men '97 (2024–present). They wanted to avoid copying one of the many different animation styles used for the animated Spider-Verse films and settled on paying homage to the early The Amazing Spider-Man comic books, specifically those featuring art by Steve Ditko and John Romita Sr. Trammell described the series as a "moving comic book", which is achieved through 3D cel-shaded animation provided by Polygon Pictures and CGCG, Inc.. Polygon was chosen because of the 2D animation look they had achieved in their previous work. Trammell said the company was able to match their desired style while keeping the "characters feeling alive and real, without feeling stiff and mechanical".
Leo Romero was the lead character designer, with comic book artists Chris Samnee, Paolo Rivera, and Ethan Young also working on the series. Trammell praised Romero for modernizing the designs while retaining classic elements. They leaned further into comic book references for Peter's Spider-Man suits and some of the villains' costumes, including those for Octavius and Gargan. Peter starts the series in a homemade suit made from "gym pants, sneakers, goggles, a blue sweatshirt, red undershirt, knee pads, very clunky web-shooters, and a red logo on the chest". He rejects several Oscorp suit designs which are based on alternate suits that Peter wears when he takes on different personas during the 1998 "Identity Crisis" comic book event: a golden suit with a red cape used for the "Prodigy" persona, a purple suit with hover-wings used for the "Hornet" persona, and a dark blue wingsuit used for the "Dusk" persona. Peter goes on to wear a white and blue Oscorp suit resembling Spider-Man's Future Foundation costume from the comics, and then a "classic 60s" red and blue suit.
By January 2025, animatics for the second season were halfway complete.


=== Music ===
Leo Birenberg and Zach Robinson were revealed to be composing the series' score in June 2024. The series' theme song, "Neighbor Like Me" by The Math Club featuring Relaye and Melo Makes Music, is a rap that samples the theme song from the animated series Spider-Man (1967–1970) by Paul Francis Webster and Bob Harris. The song was released as a single by Hollywood Records and Marvel Music on January 21, 2025.


== Marketing ==
The series was discussed during Marvel Studios Animation's panel at the 2022 San Diego Comic-Con, where character art was revealed. The series was featured in a sizzle reel of Marvel Studios Animation's 2024 series in December 2023. Trammell, Thames, and Domingo promoted the series during Marvel Studios Animation's panel at the D23 Expo in August 2024, where Domingo's role as Norman was announced and footage was shown. Footage from the series was included in a video that was released by Disney+ in October, announcing the release schedule for Marvel Television and Marvel Animation projects through the end of 2025.
Marvel Comics began releasing a five-issue comic book prequel series, also titled Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man, in December 2024. The comic was written by Christos Gage and features art by Eric Gapstur. Trammell explained that the comic book fills a timeline gap in the series' first episode. He said it was possible that more comic books could be written to fill other timeline gaps later in the series. A trailer for the series was released at the end of December, following the conclusion of What If...?'s third season. Toussaint Egan of Polygon described the series as "long-awaited", and Jordan King at Empire called it "hotly anticipated". King and IGN's Adam Bankhurst both highlighted the trailer's combination of classic Spider-Man references—including the art style and theme song—with contemporary animation and imagery. Discussing the trailer for Gizmodo, Justin Carter said it was "well worth the wait" and felt the series would be appreciated by people who wanted the MCU's Spider-Man to have some "smaller adventures".


== Release ==
Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man premiered with its first two episodes on Disney+ on January 29, 2025, with the remaining eight episodes being released weekly in groups of two or three until February 19. Chris Agar of ComicBook.com described the release schedule as unusual for an MCU series and suggested it was designed to avoid overlapping with the debut of the Disney+ series Daredevil: Born Again in March. The series was previously scheduled to be released in 2024, and a filing for the first episode with the United States Copyright Office in October 2023 had indicated an approximate release on November 2 of that year. The first season is part of Phase Five of the MCU.


== Reception ==
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports an 97% approval rating with an average rating of 8.2/10, based on 35 reviews for the first season. The site's critical consensus reads: "Embracing the wholesome aesthetics of the webslinger's original comic run while adding some fresh plot wrinkles, this family-friendly Spider-Man is a lovable incarnation of the Marvel superhero." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the first season a score of 77 out of 100 based on 10 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website  at Marvel.com
Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man at IMDb 
Your Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man on Disney+