Roblox ( , ROH-bloks) is an online game platform and game creation system developed by Roblox Corporation that allows users to program and play games created by themselves or other users. It was created by David Baszucki and Erik Cassel in 2004, and released to the public in 2006. As of August 2020, the platform has over 164 million monthly active users, including half of all American children under the age of 16.
The platform hosts millions of user-created games (officially referred to as "experiences"), all created using a dialect of the programming language Lua and the platforms game engine, Roblox Studio. While Roblox is free-to-play, it features in-game purchases done through its virtual currency known as Robux, and game developers on the platform are able to create items that cost Robux. Furthermore, the platform hosts a large virtual economy centered around those items and Robux. Using the platforms "Developer Exchange" program, creators on the platform are able to exchange their earned Robux for real-world currency. The platform has also been used to host virtual concerts and events, as well as advergames.
Early in Roblox's history, it was relatively small, both as a platform and as a company. In the second half of the 2010s, the platform began to grow rapidly, and this growth was accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of 2020, over 5,000 games on Roblox had been played over a million times, and over 20 had been played over one billion times. Although Roblox has been positively received by critics, it has faced heavy criticism for its content moderation, microtransactions, allegations of exploitative practices toward children, and more. The platform has been restricted or completely blocked in several countries, such as China, Turkey, Jordan, and others.


== Overview ==
Roblox is an online game platform and game creation system built around user-generated content and games, officially referred to as "experiences". Games can be created by any user through the platforms game engine, Roblox Studio, and then shared to and played by other players. The games featured on Roblox vary in genre, from role-playing games to ones centered around escaping prison, among others. The platform is made to appeal to a family-friendly audience, and has been described as a massively multiplayer online game (MMO). 
While Roblox is free-to-play, it features a virtual currency known as Robux that can be purchased with real-world money. Robux can be used to purchase virtual items that the player can use on their virtual character (or "avatar") on the platform, or access experiences that requirement payment. As with games, avatar items on Roblox are mainly user-generated, though most items on the platform were made by Roblox themselves for most of the platforms history. Through the platforms "Developer Exchange" program, creators on the platform are able to exchange their earned Robux to real-world money. In addition, Roblox features a monthly service called "Roblox Premium", with its subscribers gaining access to more features on the platform and a monthly stipend of Robux.


=== Virtual economy ===
Roblox features a large virtual economy centered around its aforementioned virtual currency, Robux. The currency allows users to buy, sell, and create virtual items. Roblox also has a service called "Roblox Premium", a monthly subscription that gives users monthly stipends of Robux (with the amount depending on the selected subscription tier), discounts when purchasing items, access to the item trading system, the ability to buy more Robux for cheaper, and more.
Similarly to games, many items on Roblox are user-generated. While only Roblox developers were able to create avatar items early on, the capabilities of user-generated content has expanded greatly over time. Since 2019, select users have gained the ability to publish avatar accessories, animations, bundles, and more. Some items on Roblox have a "limited" status, with only a few being available and the price of the item based on supply and demand rather than a fixed price. These items function similarly to non-fungible tokens (NFTs). The prices of limited items range, with the most valuable ones costing millions of Robux. After the original supply of that item runs out, players can resell them for a higher price. Additionally, users with an active Roblox Premium subscription are able to trade limiteds amongst each other; limited items made by the community cannot be traded, and this feature is restricted to official items.
Developers on the platform are able to create purchasable content through one-time purchases, known as "game passes", as well as microtransactions that can be purchased more than once, known as "developer products". Through the Roblox "Developer Exchange" program, users are able to exchange their earned Robux for real-world money, as long as they have over 30,000 Robux. In 2020, Roblox reported that roughly 345,000 game developers on the platform earned money through the program. Avatar item creators have also used the platform to make money, with some individuals designing items as a full-time job. In 2020, it was reported that the highest-earning creators made over $100,000 a year off of item sales.
A sizable amount of scams are on Roblox, largely revolving around messages promoting websites and games that are designed to appear to give out free Robux. Furthermore, there are people in the community known as "beamers" who compromise Roblox accounts to steal and sell their items on the platforms black markets. They employ various techniques, such as creating phishing websites or create ploys in order to acquire a victim's session token. Once they gain access to the victim's account, these "beamers" steal and subsequently sell valuable limited items owned by the victims for real-world currency or cryptocurrency through marketplace sites or Discord chat rooms. The slang term "beaming" is commonly used to describe this entire process on Roblox. Roblox does offer hacking victims a "rollback" for their items, although this is only offered once per account.


=== Roblox Studio and game design ===

Roblox Studio is the platforms game engine and game development software. The engine and all games made on Roblox predominantly uses Luau, a dialect of the Lua 5.1 programming language. Since November 2021, the programming language has been open sourced under the MIT License. Some aspects of the engine were created using C++. To assist in the creation of games, Roblox Studio features multiple pre-made templates that users can modify. 
As of 2020, Roblox reported that more than 2 million developers used Roblox Studio to create more than 20 million games per year. They also reported that a majority of developers were minors. While some developers might not make money by creating games on Roblox, it has been noted that the platform still assists with teaching people game design and how to code.


=== Games ===

Due to its status as a user-created games platform, Roblox has a variety of popular games; in May 2020, the most popular games on Roblox had over 10 million monthly active players each. As of August 2020, at least 20 games had been played more than one billion times, and at least 5,000 have been played more than one million times. TechCrunch noted in March 2021 that Roblox games are largely distinct from established traditions in free-to-play video games, finding that successful Roblox games were geared towards immediate satisfaction, and finding that the addition of tutorials significantly decreased player engagement, contrary to established wisdom about free-to-play games. Many companies have used Roblox to host advergames promoting their products.


== History and development ==


=== 2004-2009: Creation and early history ===

Roblox was first created in 2004 by co-founders and software engineers David Baszucki and Erik Cassel. Prior to the creation of the platform, both Baszucki and Cassel worked for Knowledge Revolution, a company that specialized in creating educational and physics simulation software. After Knowledge Revolution was acquired by MSC Software, the two left the company and Baszucki began investing in earlier social media sites like Friendster. Around this time, Baszucki came up with the idea of a physics sandbox with creation tools, and a social networking aspect. Baszucki and Cassel began development on Roblox shortly afterwards, modeled after Baszucki's vision, and also created the Roblox Corporation. Early in its development, Roblox was known as Dynablocks. It was determined early on in development that the two would design Roblox to rely entirely on user-generated content, only providing the tools necessary for people to develop games, as well as the server hosting.
Baszucki and Cassel worked alone while making the earlier versions of Roblox, and created their own games on the platform before the creation tools were completed. These early versions of Roblox were extremely basic, with player avatars having not been animated yet and various features only being present in their most simplified form. They also advertised Roblox on some websites, leading to a few dozen players joining the platform as playtesters. In mid-2006, the first two employees that weren't Cassel or Baszucki were hired to work on the platforms other features. These employees were Matt Dusek and John Shedletsky, with Dusek being responsible for working on the platforms communication aspects. 
Roblox was officially released on September 1, 2006, with Roblox Studio being made available that same year. Games that were made by the community early in the platforms history included paintball games, haunted houses, and model trains that players could ride. In 2008, the Roblox Corporation stopped actively creating their own games to demonstrate the platforms capabilities, becoming entirely reliant on user-created games. During this time in 2007, Roblox introduced the "Builders Club" membership subscription, which allowed for users to create more games under their account, sell virtual clothing, remove outside advertisements from the site, and gain Robux daily. Early in the platform's history, it had two separate currencies: Robux and Tix, which was short for "Tickets". 


=== 2010-2015: Early growth ===

Roblox's growth continued throughout 2010 and the following years. By August 2011, Roblox had about 6.8 million active users monthly, becoming the second-most popular kids entertainment site. Its profits also continued to increase, with the platforms profit that year up 75% from 2010; in June 2011, the company held a fundraiser that raised over $4 million. By January 2014, the platform's monthly player count had increased 10 to 12 million monthly players, although a majority of those players did not have registered accounts, and instead played as "guests". 
By this point in the platforms history, several games had been played million of times. One of the most successor creators on the platform at the time was Luke Weber, known on Roblox as "Stickmasterluke", who had a following of over ten million plays across all of his games combined. In August 2011, the first in-person convention centered around Roblox, known as the Roblox Rally, was held in San Francisco. It was attended by over 1,000 people. Later that year in December, Roblox would hold its first Hack Week, where Roblox developers worked on new, unique ideas to present to the company. In 2013, the platforms co-founder Cassel died from cancer. 
Throughout 2012, versions of Roblox for mobile devices were developed. By May, they had already released a stripped down version of the platform for iOS that only included its social features, but did not allow users to play games on it. A version of the game for macOS was also released by that point. On December 11 of that year, a full version of Roblox for iOS was released that allowed users to play games, although users were not able to use Roblox Studio. After completing development on the iOS version, Roblox began looking into releasing a version for Android devices, as well as video game consoles. The version for Android was released on July 16, 2014. A version of Roblox for Xbox One was announced in September 2015 and released on November 20. This version initially only released with selection of 15 games chosen by Roblox staff, due to concerns regarding Entertainment Software Rating Board standards. A system that allowed users to publish their games on the platform was later released, based on an approval process. 
From 2013 to 2014, Roblox released several updates to their development tools, adding new features. Among these new features was the Developer Exchange program, which initially only allowed payouts of up to $500. Other updates released around this time included adding support for character animations, Roblox Studio plugins, and Developer Stats, a feature that shows developers various statistics about their games, such as how many players were playing their game, and for how long. In May 2015, Roblox released an update that adjusted its physics engine to be more smooth and realistic, rather than being oriented around blocks. This also came with a feature called Smooth Terrain, which increased the graphic fidelity of in-game terrain. 


=== 2016-2020: Accelerated growth and COVID-19 ===
In the latter half of the 2010s, Roblox began to rapidly grow in popularity. By December 2016, the platform had about 30 million monthly active users, a number that had increased 90 million by April 2019. The platform's growth was further accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in 2020, where lockdowns led tens of millions of children to use Roblox as a means of communication. Between March and April, Roblox reported having over 120 million monthly active players, which by that point included over half of all kids in the United States that were under the age of 16. Additionally, the average number of daily active players in 2020 had increased by 85% compared to 2019. By this point, over 20 games had been played more than one billion times, and at least 5,000 had been played more than one million times. The most popular game on the platform around this time was the role-playing game Adopt Me!, which had been played over 10 billion times by July 2020 and had set a platform record of over 1.6 million users on at once. 
In light of the platforms newfound popularity and uses during lockdowns, Roblox introduced a new "Party Place" system, which were specific spaces that players could use to arrange meet-ups and events, such as virtual concerts. Around this time, Roblox began further working towards a vision that Baszucki described as a 30-year long plan where in which users have a "fully-fledged digital identity" in an environment such as Roblox. In July 2020, Baszucki formally announced plans and goals for Roblox developers and users to build a "metaverse", a concept that refers to several interconnected virtual worlds. As part of these plans, several other features were announced that would allow creators more freedom in their works, hoping to make them more "immersive" and making collaboration between developers easier. Features that were introduced around this time included Developer Events, a service that would allow creators to create and manage in-game events, and allow users to easily discover these events. He also announced a partnership between Roblox and record label Monstercat, giving users and creators the ability to use their catalog in games. In August 2019, Roblox began allowing select users to upload their own accessories, a service that was later expanded to include various other types of accessories. 
Around this time, Roblox optimized the way that its different releases were developed over the course of 3 years, reaching a point where only a minimal amount of engineers were needed to maintain the platforms it was available on and all versions functioned off of the same APIs. In April 2016, Roblox became available for Oculus Rift, alongside a variety of quality-of-life features made specifically for that platform. The company also expressed interest in porting Roblox to other virtual reality devices in the future. In June of that year, the company also released a dedicated app for Windows 10. Efforts were also made towards making Roblox more accessible, with automatic machine translation being added to in-game chat in 2020, initially supporting 9 languages. In 2019, the Roblox Corporation signed a partnership deal with Tencent to bring Roblox to China, and was given permission to release in the region on December 3, 2020. 
During this time period, several features from the platform were removed. In 2016, Roblox discontinued its secondary currency, "Tickets", making Robux the platform's only currency. It was removed due to the company believing newer players would get confused by the presence of two separate currencies. In October 2017, Roblox removed the ability for people to play as a "guest", which allowed users to play games on the platform without having to use an account. That same year, Roblox discontinued its official player forums for an undisclosed reason. Additionally, in 2019, Roblox released Roblox Premium, which replaced its previous Builders Club membership. 


=== 2021-present ===
The growth of Roblox, both as a platform and as a company, continued into 2021 and the following years. In March 2021, the Roblox Corporation went public, and became valued at $45 billion. Throughout 2021, Roblox averaged 45.5 million daily active users, a 40% increase from the end of 2020. In 2023, Roblox released public beta versions of the platform for Quest 2 and Meta Quest Pro on July 27, with full versions released in September. At the same time, ports of Roblox for PlayStation 4 and 5 were announced, and later released on October 10. In 2021, Roblox made it to where games on the platform are referred to as "experiences" following the platforms involvement in the Epic Games v. Apple lawsuit. In June of that year, Roblox was sued by the National Music Publishers' Association (NMPA), alleging that the platform allowed users to upload copyrighted music without obtaining proper licensing, and made children believe that pirating music was acceptable. The lawsuit was dropped by September 2021, ending with the Roblox Corporation and the NMPA forming a collaboration to establish a framework for future publisher partnerships.
After being given permission to release during late 2020, Roblox released in China in July 2021. This version of the platform was published and operated by Tencent, and was heavily restricted due to China's regulations on video games. Throughout 2021, the Chinese version of Roblox failed to generate much profit, and was unable to grow substantially. In January 2022, it was shut down so that Roblox could redevelop the release, and stated that it was only ever intended to be a test place. In July of that year, documents of business slides from presentations as early as 2017 were leaked online by an unknown hacker. These documents revealed that the Roblox Corporation was planning to make several changes to the platform worldwide to comply with Chinese internet censorship laws, and that prior to canceling operations, they were concerned that Tencent would hack the platform and attempt to create a competitor.
Roblox's business model throughout this time continued to be based around creating a metaverse, and attempting to increase the platforms appeal In 2021, Baszucki further detailed the companies vision for Roblox to become a metaverse, highlighting "eight different characteristics" that the platform would strive to accommodate for. He also discussed the Ready Player One and Ready Player Two books as being inspirations for the company's ideas. Features that were added to Roblox since then have included voice chat for users over the age of 13 that had their age verified through ID. Voice chat was then followed by facial animations based on the real-world motion tracking of the players face, which was announced in 2022 and released in 2023. In March 2024, two generative artificial intelligence tools that were added to Roblox Studio in an effort to speed up content creation. These tools were for automatic avatar customization and texture generation, the former being able to automatically convert three-dimensional body meshes into live-animated avatars and the latter creating textures of objects based on a text-to-image model.
Also announced in 2022 was age ratings for games, a system created by the company to increase the platform's appeal to the young adult audience, which was the fastest growing demographic on Roblox, by allowing for more mature experiences. Initially, the highest rating that games could be given was 13+, although in June 2023, a 17+ rating was introduced that would permit games to feature more graphic violence, romantic themes, and alcohol usage. Similarly, in November 2024, Roblox revamped its parental controls system, adding new safety measures for users under the age of 13, such as screen time and whether or not the child can exchange private messages with other users, and allowing parents to create separate accounts to control their child's account.


== Community and culture ==
By August 2020, Roblox had over 164 million monthly active users, including half of all American children under the age of 16. Players have used the platform to express political activism, with some users declaring their support for the George Floyd protests and Black Lives Matter, and some using the platform to perform activities that were paused by COVID-19 lockdowns like religious processions. Part of Roblox's reputation was due in part to its original sound effect for when a character died, often transcribed and titled as the "oof" sound effect, which became an internet meme. The sound was originally produced by Joey Kuras for the video game Messiah (2000), causing Roblox and Kuras to enter a copyright dispute that ended with Roblox replacing the sound with a new one in 2022.


=== Events ===
Roblox occasionally hosts real-life and virtual events. They have in the past hosted events such as BloxCon, which was a convention for ordinary players on the platform. Roblox operates annual Easter egg hunts and also hosts an annual event called the "Bloxy Awards", an awards ceremony that also functions as a fundraiser. The 2020 edition of the Bloxy Awards, held virtually on the platform, drew 600,000 viewers. In 2022, "Bloxy Awards" got rebranded into the "Roblox Innovation Awards". Roblox Corporation annually hosts the Roblox Developers Conference, a three-day invite-only event in San Francisco where top content creators on the site learn of upcoming changes to the platform. The company has also hosted similar events in cities like London.
Roblox occasionally engages in events to promote films, such as ones held to promote Wonder Woman 1984 and Aquaman. Roblox has also hosted virtual concerts, such as the one starring Lil Nas X; during that concert, Lil Nas X debuted his song "Holiday". Future virtual concerts starred artists like Swedish singer Zara Larsson and American band Twenty One Pilots. In October 2021, Roblox partnered with Chipotle Mexican Grill to give $1 million of burritos away to the first 30,000 people every day as a part of Chipotle's Halloween Boorito promotion.


== Reception and revenue ==
Common Sense Media rated Roblox 4 out of 5 stars, praising the website's variety of games and ability to encourage creativity in children while finding that the decentralized nature of the platform meant game quality varied, and recommended disabling chat functions for young players to prevent possibly harmful interactions. Patricia E. Vance of the Family Online Safety Institute advised parents to monitor their child's interactions on the platform but praised the platform for "...allowing kids to play, explore, socialize, create and learn in a self-directed way", and granting special praise to Roblox Studio for its ability to encourage children to experience game development. Trusted Reviews, in its overview of the platform, also praised Roblox Studio, stating that "for anyone seeking to develop their computer science skills, or create projects that will instantly receive feedback from a huge audience, the appeal is obvious". 


=== Revenue ===
During the 2017 Roblox Developers Conference, officials said that creators on the game platform, of which there were about 1.7 million as of 2017, collectively earned at least $30 million in 2017. The iOS version of Roblox passed $1 billion of lifetime revenue in November 2019, $1.5 billion in June 2020, and $2 billion in October 2020, making it the iOS app with the second-highest revenue. Several individual games on Roblox have accumulated revenues of over $10 million, while developers as a whole on the platform were collectively projected to have earned around $250 million over the course of 2020. It became the third highest-grossing game of 2020, with a revenue of $2.29 billion, below the Tencent titles PUBG and Honor of Kings.


=== Criticism ===
Throughout its history, Roblox has been criticized many times. Specific criticisms that Roblox has faced include those towards its chat filtration system, alleged exploitative practices that target children, sexual content, and its presence of content related to political extremism. In a 2021 study done by tech review and tutorial company Electronics Hub, which interpreted several million social media posts about 87 different mobile games and apps, Roblox was found to be one of the most disliked mobile apps. It was the most disliked app in 21 countries, mainly Eastern European countries, although it was not the most disliked app worldwide. This specific study was not able to conclude or highlight any specific reasons why audiences disliked the platform. 


==== Inappropriate content and predatory behavior ====
Roblox has received widespread criticism for its chat filtration system, as well as its presence of sexually explicit games and imagery. While content like this is prohibited on the platform, and Roblox has a chat filtration system in place to try and censor most inappropriate messages, both have been frequently bypassed, such as through third party apps. Sexually explicit content on the platform includes items such as virtual sex clubs and nightclubs, with creators of said content largely communicating through third-party platforms that cannot be regulated by Roblox moderators. To combat these issues, Roblox has 1,600 people working to remove such content from the platform, and also offers privacy settings and parental controls; a 2020 investigation by Fast Company found that sexual content was prevalent within Roblox despite attempts by moderators to remove it, likening attempts to remove the material to "whack-a-mole". In an October 2022 interview, Roblox Chief Scientist Morgan McGuire stated that moderating the platform was challenging, and compared it to attempting to shut down speakeasies.
These issues have led to numerous reports of sexual predation on child players, which a 2024 Bloomberg Businessweek report attributed to insufficient moderation, such as reliance on artificial intelligence, and how users are anonymous. The report highlighted the case of Arnold "DoctorRofatnik" Castillo, the developer of a popular Sonic the Hedgehog fangame Sonic Eclipse Online. After his personal account was banned for reports of preying on a child, he transferred the game to a friend's account and continued profiting from it. Roblox refused to take the game down, not seeing it as a safety concern; Sonic the Hedgehog's owner Sega was later notified and sent a takedown request for copyright infringement. Castillo was eventually arrested and sentenced to 15 years in prison for transporting a child across interstate boundaries for sex. Statements of anonymous Roblox Corporation employees tell that the staff struggles with high numbers of child safety reports and claim that additional safety features, such as a pop-up notice, were rejected and safety settings are off by default. The report however noticed that Roblox has improved in moderation and reported more child predators than before. Roblox has claimed that the report's accusations are "glaring mischaracterizations" and "[fail] to reflect both the complexities of online child safety".


==== Accusations of encouraging consumerism and child exploitation ====
Roblox has been criticized for making it easy for children to spend large sums of money through microtransactions, leading to numerous instances where children have spent large sums of money on the platform without parents' knowledge, and deleting the accounts of players who file chargebacks or request refunds for Robux payments through their banks, card issuers or other third-party companies. Professor Jane Juffer at Cornell University accused Roblox of encouraging consumerism in children. In April 2022, Truth in Advertising filed a complaint against Roblox with the Federal Trade Commission for false advertising, mainly failing to disclose when advertising is present, such as with advergames and brand ambassadors. As a response, in March 2023, Roblox started hiding advertisements from users under the age of 13. However, these restrictions did not apply to advergames, leading to further criticism by Truth in Advertising and children's digital rights organization 5Rights.
Similarly, Roblox has been criticized by investigative journalism YouTube channel People Make Games, who accused the platform of "exploiting" child game developers by promising them large amounts of money from creating games, only to apply high revenue cuts and leaving creators with little to no income. The platform business model was also likened to a company scrip. After Roblox requested the channel to take down the video, People Make Games instead released several more accusations towards Roblox. These included its alleged lack of oversight of developers and a method for people to address developer abuse, leading to child developers being exploited for labor on third-party platforms. They also highlighted the Arnold "DoctorRofatnik" Castillo case, and criticized the platforms virtual econom, comparing the limited collectibles market to function like gambling and thus encouraging children to seek unofficial and unsafe trading sites to easily obtain highly valuable items, and refusing to help a developer whose account was hacked and had its collectibles and assets stolen.


==== Political extremism and far-right content ====
Roblox has been widely criticized for its presence of content related to political extremism, particularly far-right ideologies such as neo-fascism and neo-Nazism. While content like this is not tolerated on Roblox, there have been various methods discovered to get material similar to it onto Roblox regardless. According to The Weekend Australian, several online forums exist that teach Roblox users how to make content based on Nazi Germany without being banned, such as adjusting the Nazi flag by rearranging its colors or altering the Swastika. 
In May 2021, researcher Daniel Kelley of the Anti-Defamation League reported that numerous games on Roblox have recreated mass shootings, specifically highlighting three different games that recreated the 2019 Christchurch mosque shootings, and criticized Roblox for being unable to moderate them. Later that year in June, Cecilia D'Anastasio of Wired reported the existence of numerous groups and games on Roblox that simulated real-world military units and regimes, such as the Wehrmacht, and also noted their popularity on the platform before Roblox moderators would take them down. A specific example that was provided was a game called Innsbruck Border Simulator, a game that had players take on the role of Nazis, which was played over a million times before it was deleted. In 2023, Gamesindustry.biz reported that congresswoman Lori Trahan criticized numerous video game companies for failing to address questions on how to combat online extremism, but noted Roblox to be an exception, with them claiming to have a team dedicated to moderating extremist content. The website, however, mentioned the company's aforementioned criticism for being unable to moderate games that recreated real world shootings.


=== Restrictions by country ===

Roblox has been banned in these countries: China, Jordan, North Korea, Oman and Turkey. Additionally, it was banned in the United Arab Emirates from 2018 to 2021, and Guatemala issued a warning about the platform to parents in 2021. The reasons behind these bans differ from country to country, with China banning it due to its American origin and perceived anti-communist propaganda, aiming to protect Chinese children from perceived anti-communist influences, and Turkey banning it due to content that may lead to gambling and child sexual abuse. Additionally, the Netherlands and Belgium have restricted certain games on the platform due to their regulations on in-game "lootboxes", which give out items based on random or unknown chances, to reduce children's exposure to gambling.


== Toy lines ==
In January 2017, toy fabricator Jazwares partnered with Roblox Corporation to produce toy minifigures based on user-generated content created by developers on the platform. The minifigures have limbs and joints similar to that of Lego minifigures, though they are about twice the size. The minifigures have limbs and accessories that are interchangeable. The sets included a code that was used to redeem virtual items, as well as blind boxes that contained random minifigures. In 2019, Jazwares released a new line of toys, branded as the "Roblox Desktop" series. In April 2021, Roblox partnered with Hasbro to release Roblox-themed Nerf blasters and a Roblox-themed version of Monopoly.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website