Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll ( shə-KEER-ə, Spanish: [ʃaˈkiɾa isaˈβel meβaˈɾak riˈpol]; born 2 February 1977) is a Colombian singer-songwriter. Referred to as the "Queen of Latin Music", she has had a significant impact on the musical landscape of Latin America and has been credited with popularizing Hispanophone music on a global level. The recipient of various accolades, she has won four Grammy Awards and fifteen Latin Grammy Awards, including three Song of the Year wins.
Born and raised in Barranquilla, Shakira made her recording debut with Sony Music Colombia at the age of 14. Following the commercial failure of her first two albums, Magia (1991) and Peligro (1993), she rose to prominence with the next two, Pies Descalzos (1995) and Dónde Están los Ladrones? (1998). Shakira entered the English-language market with her fifth album, Laundry Service (2001), which sold over 13 million copies worldwide, becoming the best-selling album of all time by a female Latin artist. Her success was further solidified with the Spanish-language albums Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (2005), Sale el Sol (2010), El Dorado (2017), and Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran (2024), all of which topped the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart, making her the first woman with number-one albums across four different decades. Her English-language albums Oral Fixation, Vol. 2 (2005), She Wolf (2009), and Shakira (2014) received platinum certifications in various countries worldwide.
Shakira scored numerous number-one singles and other top songs worldwide, including "Estoy Aquí", "Ciega, Sordomuda", "Ojos Así", "Whenever, Wherever", "Underneath Your Clothes", "Objection (Tango)", "La Tortura", "Hips Don't Lie", "Beautiful Liar", "She Wolf", "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", "Loca", "Rabiosa", "Can't Remember to Forget You", "Dare (La La La)", "La Bicicleta", "Chantaje", "Te Felicito", "Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", and "TQG". Outside of music, Shakira served as a coach on two seasons of the American singing competition television series The Voice (2013–2014), had a voice role in the animated film Zootopia (2016), and executive produced and judged the dance competition series Dancing with Myself (2022).
With over 100 million certified records sold worldwide, Shakira is one of the world's best-selling musicians. Noted to be a "global phenom" whose impact has "reached every corner of the world", Shakira has been described as an "artistic link between the west and the east" for popularizing Middle Eastern sounds in the West, and western sounds in the East (mainly the Middle East). She is credited with opening the doors of the international market for other Latin artists. Billboard named her the Top Female Latin Artist of the Decade twice (2000s and 2010s), and ranked her among the Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century in 2024. For her philanthropic work with her Barefoot Foundation and her contributions to music, she received the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year and Harvard Foundation Artist of the Year awards in 2011. Shakira was appointed to the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics in the United States in 2011, and Chevalier of the Order of Arts and Letters by the French government in 2012.


== Early life ==
Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll was born on 2 February 1977 in Barranquilla, Colombia. She is the only child of William Mebarak Chadid and Nidia Ripoll Torrado. She is of Spanish and Lebanese descent. Her father William was born in New York City to a family from Lebanon. When he was five, his family moved to Colombia. Her mother's side has two Spanish surnames, Ripoll and Torrado, the former of which is Catalan and originates from four brothers who immigrated from Catalonia to coastal Colombia in the 19th century. She has also stated that she has distant Italian roots through an ancestor with the surname "Pisciotti". She was raised Catholic and attended Catholic schools. She has eight older half-siblings from her father's previous marriage. Shakira spent much of her youth in Barranquilla, a city located on the northern Caribbean coast of Colombia.
Shakira wrote her first poem, titled "La rosa de cristal" ('The Crystal Rose'), when she was only four years old. As she was growing up, she was fascinated watching her father writing stories on a typewriter, and asked for one as a Christmas gift. She got that typewriter at age seven, and has continued writing poetry since then. These poems eventually evolved into songs. When Shakira was two years old, her older half-brother was killed, at the age of nineteen, in a motorcycle accident; six years later, at age eight, Shakira wrote her first song, titled "Tus gafas oscuras" ('Your dark glasses'), which was inspired by her father, who for years wore dark glasses to hide his grief.
When Shakira was four, her father took her to a local Middle Eastern restaurant, where Shakira first heard the doumbek, a traditional drum used in Middle-Eastern music and which typically accompanied belly dancing. She started dancing on the table, and the experience made her realize that she wanted to be a performer. She enjoyed singing for schoolmates and teachers (and even the nuns) at her Catholic school, but in second grade, she was rejected for the school choir because her vibrato was too strong. The music teacher told her that she sounded "like a goat". At school, she was often sent out of the class because of her hyperactivity. She says she had also been known as "the belly dancer girl", as she would demonstrate every Friday at school a number she had learned. "That's how I discovered my passion for live performance," she says.
To instill gratitude in Shakira for her upbringing, her father took her to a local park to see orphans who lived there. The images stayed with her, and she said to herself: "One day I'm going to help these kids when I become a famous artist."
Between the ages of ten and thirteen, Shakira was invited to various events in Barranquilla and gained some recognition in the area. It was at this approximate time that she met local theater producer Monica Ariza, who was impressed with her and as a result tried to help her career. During a flight from Barranquilla to Bogotá, Ariza convinced Sony Music Colombia executive Ciro Vargas to hold an audition for Shakira in a hotel lobby. Vargas held Shakira in high regard and, returning to the Sony Music Colombia office, gave the cassette to a song and artist director. However, the director was not overly excited and thought Shakira was something of "a lost cause". Undaunted and still convinced that Shakira had talent, Vargas set up an audition in Bogotá. He arranged for Sony Music Colombia executives to arrive at the audition, with the idea of surprising them with Shakira's performance. She performed three songs for the executives and impressed them enough for her to be signed to record three albums.


== Career ==


=== 1990–1994: The beginnings ===
Shakira's debut album, Magia, was recorded with Sony Music Entertainment (Colombia) from 1990, when she was only 13 years old. The songs are a collection composed by her since she was eight and by others, mixed pop-rock ballads and disco uptempo songs with electronic accompaniment and some live musicians. The album was released in June 1991 and featured "Magia" (provided with a music video) and three other singles. Though it fared well on Colombian radio and gave the young Shakira much exposure, the album did not fare well commercially as only 1,200 copies were sold in Colombia. After the poor performance of Magia, Shakira's label urged her to return to the studio to release a follow-up record. Little known outside of her native Colombia at the time, Shakira was invited to perform at Chile's Viña del Mar International Song Festival in February 1993. The festival gave aspiring Latin American singers a chance to perform their songs, and the winner was then chosen by a panel of judges. Shakira performed the ballad "Eres" ("You Are") and won the trophy for third place. One of the judges who voted for her to win was the then 20-year-old Ricky Martin.
Shakira's second studio album, titled Peligro, was released in March 1993. More developed than Magia, it lists many musicians who participated in the recordings, has fuller sound and features a video for "Tú Serás la Historia de Mi Vida". But Shakira was not pleased with the final result, mainly taking issue with the production. The album was better received than Magia had been, though it was also considered a commercial failure due to Shakira's refusal to advertise or promote it. Of the eighteen songs presented on Magia and Peligro, nine were written by Shakira. In her later work, Shakira generally did not refer to or perform songs from the first two albums. From 1994 to 1997, Shakira starred in the Colombian TV series El Oasis, loosely based on the 1985 Armero tragedy.
Shakira originally recorded the song "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?" (later included on her album Pies Descalzos) for the compilation album Nuestro Rock Volumen II, released in Colombia in 1994.
Shakira graduated from secondary school at an early age, but her professional involvement in music prevented her from continuing formal education.


=== 1995–2000: Latin breakthrough with Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? ===
Shakira returned to recording music under Sony Music Columbia in 1995 with Luis Fernando Ochoa, her principal music collaborator for her next three albums: Pies Descalzos, The Remixes and Dónde Están los Ladrones?. Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? are Shakira's most important albums. The Remixes is a highly popular album where Shakira showcases newly recorded songs and vocals, while Ochoa demonstrates his instrument playing and music production skills.
Shakira began using musical influences from a number of world regions and genres, the trend she continued and cultivated later in her career. Recording for her third studio album and her international debut album, titled Pies Descalzos, started in February 1995, after the success of her single "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?".
The Pies Descalzos album was released in October 1995. It reached number five on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums chart. The album spawned six hit singles, "Estoy Aquí", which reached number two on the U.S. Latin chart, "¿Dónde Estás Corazón?" which reached number five on the U.S. Latin chart, "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos" which reached number 11 on the U.S. Latin chart, "Un Poco de Amor" which reached number six on the U.S. Latin chart, "Antología" which reached number 15 on the U.S. Latin chart, and "Se Quiere, Se Mata" which reached number eight on the U.S. Latin chart. Pies Descalzos achieved top ranking in eight countries, and in August 1996 RIAA certified the album platinum status in the U.S.
Of the eleven songs on Pies Descalzos album, all list Shakira as the first author and Luis F. Ochoa as the second one; the same is true regarding the twelve tracks on The Remixes.
In October 1995, Shakira commenced her first international tour, named simply Tour Pies Descalzos. The tour consisted of 112 shows and went on for two years. Among Shakira's remarkable recorded stage performances of that era are the initial 6 October 1995 Concierto de Lanzamiento de Pies Descalzos in Bogota, Colombia, the 22 November 1996 Tour Pies Descalzos concert at Mexico City's Auditorio Nacional attended by 10,000 spectators, and the 1997 Viña del Mar International Song Festival concert in Chile. Ochoa was responsible for musical and artistic production during the tour, with Shakira's co-production. Besides singing, dancing and speaking to the assembled (she values communications very highly and has said that her most important treasure is "words"), Shakira played the guitar and, prominently at that time, harmonica. Shakira's singing and movements reflected an "angry-young-woman-rock attitude", enthusiastically applauded by her audiences. "Vuelve" was the opening rock anthem salvo at concerts of the tour.
In 1997, Shakira received three Billboard Latin Music Awards for Album of the Year for Pies Descalzos, Video of the Year for "Estoy Aqui", and Best New Artist. Pies Descalzos eventually sold over 5 million copies. Its success prompted the release of a remix album titled The Remixes, of which over one million were sold. The Remixes also included Portuguese language versions of "Estoy Aquí", "Un Poco de Amor" and "Pies Descalzos, Sueños Blancos", which were recorded as a result of Shakira's success in the Brazilian market, where Pies Descalzos sold nearly one million copies. Even before becoming fluent in English, Shakira learned Portuguese and was able to converse with her hosts on her visits to Brazil. At 19, Shakira was the best-selling female pop rocker in Latin America. She was named a national cultural ambassador by the president of Colombia, a distinction she shares with the writer Gabriel García Márquez.
Her fourth studio album was titled Dónde Están los Ladrones? It was recorded at the Miami studio of Gloria and Emilio Estefan, produced by Shakira with Emilio Estefan as the executive producer, and released in September 1998. The album's name was inspired by an incident at an airport where a suitcase containing her written lyrics was stolen. Dónde Están los Ladrones? became an even bigger worldwide hit than Pies Descalzos. The album had reached a peak position of number 131 on the U.S. Billboard 200 and held the top spot on the U.S. Latin Albums chart for 11 weeks. It has sold over 7 million copies worldwide and 1.5 million copies in the U.S. alone, making it one of the best selling Spanish albums in the U.S. Eight singles were taken from the album: "Ciega, Sordomuda", "Moscas En La Casa", "No Creo", "Inevitable", "Tú", "Si Te Vas", "Octavo Día", and "Ojos Así". "Ciega, Sordomuda" and "Tú" reached number one on the U.S. Latin chart, but it was "Ojos Así", together with its Arabic connotations and a striking video, that had become a truly global hit. The song infused elements of Arabic pop.
Of the eleven songs on Dónde Están los Ladrones?, all were created primarily by Shakira again. Music of five was co-written by Ochoa and there were other music co-authors, except for "Moscas en la Casa" and "Que Vuelvas", which were written entirely by Shakira.
In 1999, Shakira received a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Latin Rock or Alternative Album. Her first live album, MTV Unplugged, was recorded in New York City as MTV Unplugged's first Spanish language broadcast on 12 August 1999 and released in early 2000. It also topped the Latin charts and sale statistics. Highly acclaimed by American critics, it is rated as one of her best live performances. (There is, however, a Sony Pictures DVD titled SHAKIRA – TOUR PIES DESCALZOS. It depicts Shakira's 1997 Festival Viña del Mar concert, also one of her finest moments.) In March 2000, Shakira embarked on her Tour Anfibio, a two-month tour of Latin America and the United States. In August 2000, she won an MTV Video Music Award in the category of People's Choice – Favorite International Artist for "Ojos Así". In September 2000, Shakira performed "Ojos Así" at the inaugural ceremony of the Latin Grammy Awards, where she was nominated in five categories: Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for MTV Unplugged, Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for "Octavo Día", Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for "Ojos Así", and Best Short Form Music Video for the "Ojos Así" video.
Dónde Están los Ladrones? was a very effective presentation of Shakira's strong-willed persona and her self-analysis; it enhanced her already tremendous popularity with her female fans.


=== 2001–2004: English transition with Laundry Service ===
Upon the success of Dónde Están los Ladrones? and MTV Unplugged, Shakira began working on an English crossover album. Her manager, Emilio Estefan, took an early notice of Shakira's unprecedented, among Latin American artists, potential for a "crossover" into the enormous U.S. music market because of her "universally catchy pop-rock melodies, cerebral lyrics, unwavering self-determination and natural sex appeal". Shakira's English language skills were improved with the help of Gloria Estefan. As Latin music sales were growing in the U.S. at twice the total industry rate, Tommy Mottola, head of Sony Music, referred to Shakira as an "absolutely brilliant artist" and predicted Latin music to be the global reservoir of talent in the future. 
Shakira worked for over a year on new material for the album. "Whenever, Wherever", called "Suerte" in the simultaneously published Spanish language version, was released at the end of August 2001 as the first and lead single from her first album intended for English-speaking audience and fifth studio album. The song took heavy influence from Andean music, including the charango and panpipes in its instrumentation. It became an international success by reaching number one in most countries. In the U.S., it reached number six on the Hot 100.

Shakira's new album, titled Laundry Service in English-speaking countries and Servicio de Lavanderia in Latin America and Spain, was released on 13 November 2001. Servicio de Lavanderia features the same songs, arranged in different order. Nine out of thirteen tracks Shakira sings in English. The album debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, selling over 200,000 records in its first week. It was later certified triple platinum. It had established, for the most part, Shakira's musical presence in the mainstream North American market. "Underneath Your Clothes", "Objection (Tango)", "The One", "Te Dejo Madrid", "Que Me Quedes Tú", and "Poem to a Horse" were other Laundry Service songs issued as singles.
The rock and Spanish dance-influenced album, created for the English-language market, gained mild critical success, with some critics claiming that Shakira's English skills were too weak for her to write songs in that language. Rolling Stone, for one, stated that "she sounds downright silly" or "Shakira's magic is lost in translation". A similar view was expressed by Elizabeth Mendez Berry in Vibe: "While her Spanish-language albums sparkled with elegant wordplay, this record is rife with cliches, both musically and lyrically. [...] For Anglophone Latin lovers, Shakira's lyrics are best left to the imagination." Despite such critique, Laundry Service became the best-selling album of 2002, selling eventually more than 15 million copies worldwide. It became the most successful album in Shakira's career to date and she was considered the biggest Latin female crossover artist in the world. In Chicago Tribune, journalist Joshua Klein, while not uncritical of aspects of Shakira's stagecraft as displayed at the United Center in January 2003, characterized her "international ascent" as "as multilateral, multicultural and cooperative as they come." Klein wrote of Shakira who dyed her dark hair blond, "enlisted Gloria Estefan's husband to help her with her crossover mission", and produced a "so resolutely middle-of-the-road" current batch of music. According to him, the singer emphasized theatrics over artistic integrity and craft, but she also "dedicated much of her set to her Spanish songs", "briefly played politics" and "played up her place as a girl-power icon". Shakira released four songs for Pepsi for her promotion in the English markets: "Ask for More", "Pide Más", "Knock on My Door", and "Pídeme el Sol".
In 2002, at Aerosmith's MTV Icon in April 2002, Shakira performed "Dude (Looks Like a Lady)". Also in 2002, she joined Cher, Whitney Houston, Celine Dion, Mary J. Blige, Anastacia, and the Dixie Chicks for VH1 Divas Live Las Vegas. In August, she performed "Objection (Tango)" at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards, and won the International Viewer's Choice Award with "Suerte / Whenever, Wherever". She also won the Latin Grammy Award for the category of Best Short Form Music Video for the Spanish version of the video. In October, she won five MTV Video Music Awards Latin America for Best Female Artist, Best Pop Artist, Best Artist – North (Region), Video of the Year (for "Suerte"), and Artist of the Year. In November 2002, she embarked on the Tour of the Mongoose and 61 shows took place by May 2003. The tour was also her first worldwide tour, as legs were played in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia. In 2002, Shakira's label Sony Music Entertainment released her Spanish greatest-hits compilation, Grandes Éxitos. A DVD and 10-track live album, named Live & Off the Record, was released in 2004, and three million sets were sold worldwide. It commemorated the Tour of the Mongoose.


=== 2005–2007: Fijación Oral, vol. 1 and Oral Fixation, vol. 2 ===
Preparing for her next productions, Shakira wrote sixty songs, in Spanish and in English. Out of these she selected twenty to be used in two albums, separated by language.
The lead single from Shakira's sixth studio album, the Spanish Fijación Oral, vol. 1, named "La Tortura", was released in April 2005 and featured the Spanish balladeer Alejandro Sanz. For a record 25 weeks it remained on the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart. "La Tortura" reached number 23 on the Hot 100, number one in Spain and enjoyed high rankings across the world. Shakira and Sanz, who sang "La Tortura", and Daddy Yankee, were the first ever artists to perform Spanish language songs at the MTV Video Music Awards; it took place at the 2005 edition of the Awards in Miami.
Fijación Oral, vol. 1 became available in June 2005 and was very well received in North America, South America, and Europe. It debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 157,000 copies in its first week. Fijación Oral had thus become the highest U.S. debut ever for a Spanish-language album. It has since sold over two million copies in the U.S., earning an 11× Platinum (Latin field) certification from the RIAA. After only a day of release in Latin America, the album earned certifications. In Venezuela, it earned a Platinum certification, in Colombia, a triple Platinum certification, while in Mexico demand exceeded shipments and the album was unavailable after only one day of release. It became a top album in Spain, Italy, Greece and Germany, and received high ratings in many other countries. Four other singles were also released from the album: "No", "Día de Enero", "La Pared", and "Las de la Intuición". Fijación Oral, vol. 1 has since sold over five million copies worldwide. On 8 February 2006, Shakira was granted her second Grammy Award with the win of Best Latin Rock/Alternative Album for Fijación Oral, vol. 1. She received four Latin Grammy Awards in November 2006, winning in the categories of Record of the Year, Song of the Year for "La Tortura", Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for Fijación Oral, vol. 1.

Shakira's second English studio album and seventh studio album, Oral Fixation, vol. 2, was released in November 2005. The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200, selling 128,000 copies in its first week. It went on to sell 1.8 million records in the U.S. and over eight million copies worldwide.
The lead single for Oral Fixation, vol. 2, "Don't Bother", in the U.S. missed the top 40 on the Hot 100. It did, however, reach the top 20 in most countries worldwide. "Hips Don't Lie", which featured Wyclef Jean, was released as the album's second single in February 2006. It became Shakira's first number one single on the Billboard Hot 100. It reached number one in over 55 countries as well. Shakira and Wyclef Jean also recorded the "Hips Don't Lie - Bamboo" version. It was sung by them at the closing ceremony of the 2006 FIFA World Cup. Shakira released the third and final single from the album, "Illegal", which featured Carlos Santana, in November 2006. She embarked on the Oral Fixation Tour. The tour consisted of 120 shows between June 2006 and December 2007; five continents were visited. In February 2007, Shakira performed for the first time at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards and earned the nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals for "Hips Don't Lie" with Wyclef Jean. Her third live album, Oral Fixation Tour, was released in November 2007. In 2006, Shakira was honored with the Billboard Spirit of Hope Award for her Fundación Pies Descalzos.
In late 2006, Shakira and Alejandro Sanz sang "Te Lo Agradezco, Pero No" as a duet; the song is featured on Sanz's album El Tren de los Momentos. "Te Lo Agradezco, Pero No" was a top ten hit in Latin America and topped the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart. Shakira also collaborated with Miguel Bosé on the duet "Si Tú No Vuelves", which was released in Bosé's album Papito. In early 2007, Shakira worked with American R&B singer Beyoncé on the track "Beautiful Liar", which was released as the second single from the deluxe edition of Beyoncé's album B'Day. In April 2007, the single jumped 91 positions on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, from 94 to three, setting the record for the largest upward movement in the history of the chart at the time. It was also number one on the official UK Singles Chart. "Beautiful Liar" earned them a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. Shakira was also featured on Annie Lennox's song "Sing", from the album Songs of Mass Destruction, together with 23 other female singers. In late 2007, Shakira and Wyclef Jean recorded their second duet, "King and Queen". The song was featured on Wyclef Jean's 2007 album Carnival Vol. II: Memoirs of an Immigrant.
Shakira wrote the lyrics, and jointly composed the music, for two new songs that are featured in the movie Love in the Time of Cholera, based on the novel of the same title written by Colombian author and Nobel Prize winner Gabriel García Márquez. García Márquez himself asked Shakira to write the songs. The songs that Shakira provided for the soundtrack were a version of "Pienso en ti" from her breakthrough album Pies Descalzos, "Hay Amores", and "Despedida". "Despedida" was nominated for Best Original Song at the 65th Golden Globe Awards.


=== 2008–2009: She Wolf ===

In early 2008, Forbes named Shakira the fourth top-earning female artist in the music industry. That year, Shakira signed a contract with Live Nation Entertainment, an international touring conglomerate, which was to remain in effect for ten years. According to the artist, the deal would encompass tours, recordings, sponsorship and merchandise worldwide. Her existing contract with Epic Records called for three more albums – one in English, one in Spanish, and a compilation, but the touring and other rights under the Live Nation contract were to begin immediately.
On 17 May 2008, before an audience of over 150,000 people, Shakira was one of the artists who performed at the ALAS Foundation charity concert in Buenos Aires. Invited by Alejandro Sanz, she led the presentation of his song "No es lo Mismo". Mercedes Sosa, Shakira and Pedro Aznar performed there a cover of Silvio Rodríguez's song "La Maza"
On 18 January 2009, Shakira performed in Washington, D.C. at the Lincoln Memorial "We Are One" festivities in honor of the inauguration of President Barack Obama. She sang "Higher Ground" with Stevie Wonder and Usher. In June 2009, a studio recording of "La Maza" by Sosa featuring Shakira was featured on Sosa's album Cantora, un Viaje Íntimo.
In July 2009, Shakira released "She Wolf" as the lead single from an upcoming album with the same title. The single was a commercial success, receiving certifications in 17 countries. Shakira released her eighth studio and third (mostly) English album She Wolf in October 2009. The album received mainly positive reviews from critics. Mike Diver on BBC Review sees in it "perhaps the most enjoyably varied pop album of 2009" but detects "a greater sense of passion in songs playing out in her native tongue". Beyond the chart-conquering smashes, Shakira has "often explored some truly mind-boggling pop territories, deep-drilling for veins of inspiration absolutely alien to so many of her peers". "She Wolf" was included in AllMusic's year-end "Favorite Albums," "Favorite Latin Albums," and "Favorite Pop Albums" lists. It reached number one on the charts of Argentina, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, and Switzerland. It also charted inside the top five in Spain, Germany, and the United Kingdom. It debuted at number fifteen on the Billboard 200. It was certified double-platinum in Colombia and Mexico, platinum in Italy and Spain, and gold in numerous countries including France and the United Kingdom. The album sold 2 million copies worldwide, becoming one of Shakira's least successful studio albums to date in terms of sales. Four singles were released off the album: "She Wolf", "Did It Again", "Give It Up to Me", and "Gypsy". "Good Stuff" was released as the album's sole promotional single.


=== 2010–2015: "Waka Waka", Sale el Sol and Shakira ===

In 2010, Shakira collaborated with the South African band Freshlyground to create the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" is based on a song called "Zangaléwa", with lyrics written in Fang and other languages, performed by the group Golden Sounds from Cameroon. The Golden Sounds' hit originated in turn from traditional Cameroonian soldiers' marching chant. Released on 7 May 2010, "Waka Waka" was then performed by Shakira at the World Cup kick-off and closing. According to her, the FIFA World Cup  "represents an event that has the power to unite and integrate, and that's what this song is about". The "Waka Waka" single reached the top 20 in countries of Europe, South America and Africa and the top 40 in the U.S. "Waka Waka" sold more than four million copies worlwide and became the biggest-selling World Cup song of all time.
For her involvement with the World Cup related campaigns and other philanthropic work, Shakira received the 2010 Free Your Mind MTV award. On that occasion, she thanked "all the people around the world who joined me with the Waka Waka and who danced for the cause of promoting universal education so that millions of children living in the developing world can have a chance at their own dreams."
In October 2010, Shakira released Sale el Sol, her ninth studio album. It received critical acclaim and was included in AllMusic's "Favorite Albums of 2010" and "Favorite Latin Albums of 2010" year-end lists. At the 2011 Latin Grammy Awards ceremony, Sale el Sol was nominated for "Album of the Year" and "Best Female Pop Vocal Album", winning the award in the latter category. Commercially, the album was a success throughout Europe and Latin America. Sale el Sol peaked atop the charts of Belgium, Croatia, France, Mexico, Portugal, and Spain. In the United States, it debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart, marking the highest debut for a Latin album for the year; it was Shakira's fifth album to peak at number one in the Latin albums category. According to Billboard, 35% of its first-week sales were digital. The album peaked at number one on both the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts, due in part to strong digital sales. The lead single, "Loca", was number one in many countries. "Sale el Sol", "Rabiosa", "Antes de las Seis", and "Addicted to You" were also released as singles. Sale el Sol has sold ten million copies since its release.
In August 2011, Shakira participated in an episode of Dora the Explorer, animated TV series. A song off the episode titled "Todos Juntos" by Dora, featuring Shakira, was released with a music video. In September, Shakira embarked on The Sun Comes Out World Tour, in support of her two most recent albums. The tour visited countries in North America, Europe, South America, Asia, and Africa with 107 shows in all. The tour was met with positive reactions from critics, who praised Shakira's stage presence and energy during her performances. In December 2011 Shakira released her fourth live album, Live from Paris. The album was promoted with the release of "Je l'aime à mourir" as a single.

On 9 November 2011, Shakira was honored as Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year and performed a cover of Joe Arroyo's song "En Barranquilla Me Quedo" at the Mandalay Bay Events Center, as a tribute to the singer who had died earlier that year. In 2010 Shakira collaborated with rapper Pitbull for the song "Get It Started", which was slated to be the lead single from Pitbull's 2012 album Global Warming. The single was released on 28 June 2012. Shakira signed to Roc Nation as her management for the upcoming studio album. In September 2012, it was announced that Shakira and Usher would replace in March 2013 Christina Aguilera and CeeLo Green as coaches for the fourth season of the U.S. TV show The Voice. In January 2013 Ivete Sangalo released a single titled "Dançando", featuring Shakira, off her album Real Fantasia. In February 2013, Draco Rosa released "Blanca Mujer", a duet he sang with Shakira, as a promotional single.
Shakira originally planned to release a new album in 2012, but plans to release the single and video were postponed due to her pregnancy. In December 2013 it was announced that Shakira's new single ("Can't Remember to Forget You", a duet with Rihanna) would be issued in January 2014. Shakira, the artist's self-titled tenth studio album, was released in March 2014. Commercially, the album debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with first-week sales of 85,000 copies. Because of that, Shakira became the singer's highest-charting album on Billboard 200, although it also had her lowest first-week sales figure (for an English-language album). The album spawned three singles. After releasing the first two, "Can't Remember to Forget You" and "Empire", RCA chose "Dare (La La La)" as the third single. The song "Medicine" was released as a promotional single off the album. The World Cup version of "Dare (La La La)" was officially released on 27 May to impact radio stations; it features Brazilian musician Carlinhos Brown. On 13 July 2014, Shakira performed "La La La (Brazil 2014)" with Carlinhos Brown at the 2014 FIFA World Cup closing ceremony at the Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro. It was her third consecutive appearance at a FIFA World Cup.


=== 2016–2020: El Dorado and Super Bowl LIV ===
Shakira starred as a voice actress in the 2016 animated movie Zootopia, voicing a character named Gazelle and singing a song titled "Try Everything". She began work on her eleventh studio album at the beginning of 2016. In May 2016, she collaborated with Colombian singer Carlos Vives on the track "La Bicicleta", which went to win the Latin Grammy Award for Record of the Year and Song of the Year. On 28 October 2016, Shakira released the single "Chantaje" with Colombian singer Maluma; though the song was a track from the upcoming eleventh studio album, it was not intended to be the lead single. The song became Shakira's most-viewed YouTube video, with over 2.1 billion views as of 1 June 2018. On 7 April 2017, Shakira released the song "Me Enamoré" as the second official single taken from her eleventh studio album El Dorado, which was released on 26 May 2017. She also released the song "Perro Fiel" featuring American singer Nicky Jam as a promotional single for the album on 25 May 2017. Its official release as the third single took place on 15 September 2017, the same date its music video, which was filmed in Barcelona on 27 July 2017, was released. Before being released as a single, "Perro Fiel" was already certified as gold in Spain for selling over 20,000 copies on 30 August 2017.
In January 2018, Shakira won her third Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album for El Dorado, making her the only female Latin artist to do so. She then released "Trap", the fourth single off the album and her second collaboration with Maluma.
The El Dorado World Tour was announced on 27 June 2017, through Shakira's official Twitter account, and was slated to be sponsored by Rakuten. Other announced partners of the tour were Live Nation Entertainment's Global Touring Division (which had previously collaborated with Shakira on her The Sun Comes Out World Tour) and Citi, which the press release named as, respectively, the producer and the credit card for the North American leg of the tour.
The tour, it was announced, would begin on 8 November, in Cologne, Germany. But due to voice-strain related problems the singer experienced during her tour rehearsals, the date was cancelled one day before the original tour schedule, and it was announced that it would be rescheduled for a later date. On 9 November, for the same reason, she also announced the postponements to later dates, to be determined and announced, for both shows in Paris, as well as the following ones in Antwerp and Amsterdam. On 14 November, Shakira made an announcement, through her social networks, in which she revealed that she had suffered a haemorrhage on her right vocal cord in late October, at her last series of rehearsals, and that she thus needed to rest her voice for some time to recover; this forced the postponement of the tour's entire European itinerary to 2018.
The Latin American dates were expected to be announced later, when the tour resumed. There were plans to bring the tour, when it did resume, to countries such as the Dominican Republic. In addition, a journalist from the Brazilian edition of the Portuguese newspaper Destak announced, on his Twitter account, that the Colombian singer would visit Brazil the following March. However, according to the same newspaper, due to Shakira's hiatus to recover from her vocal-cord haemorrhage, the Latin American dates were also postponed to the second half of 2018. Eventually, Shakira did recover fully from the haemorrhage she had suffered and resumed her tour, performing in Hamburg, Germany on 3 June 2018.
In January 2018 she announced the dates for her El Dorado World Tour. She began the first leg of her tour in Europe, starting in Hamburg, Germany on 3 June. In the same month, she released a collaboration with Maluma titled "Clandestino" as a standalone single The European leg of the tour ended in Barcelona, Spain on 7 July. She then spent a short time in Asia on 11 and 13 July, after which she went to North America. She started her time there on 3 August in Chicago and finished in San Francisco on 7 September. Her tour dates for Latin America started in Mexico City on 11 October. On the same month, Shakira was featured on a remix of Camilo and Pedro Capó's single "Tutu". The El Dorado World Tour finished in Bogotá, Colombia on 3 November, and on the same day "Nada" was released as the fifth and final single off El Dorado. She released her fifth live album Shakira in Concert: El Dorado World Tour in November 2019. Forbes ranked her among the world's highest-paid women in music in 2019, at number 10. In January 2020, she released "Me Gusta", a collaboration with Puerto Rican rapper Anuel AA.
In February 2020, she and Jennifer Lopez performed for the Super Bowl LIV halftime show. According to Billboard, the halftime show had a viewership of 103 million people. On YouTube, it became the most viewed halftime show at that point in time. Shakira appeared in two television specials performing her songs during the COVID-19 pandemic, including Global Goal: Unite for Our Future (with "Sale el Sol") and The Disney Family Singalong: Volume II (with "Try Everything"). In December 2020, she was featured on Black Eyed Peas' single "Girl Like Me".


=== 2021–present: Dancing with Myself and Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran ===
In January 2021, Shakira sold her catalog of 145 songs to Hipgnosis Songs Fund. Financial details of the sale were not disclosed. On 16 July 2021, Shakira released a single titled "Don't Wait Up", her first English-language song since "Try Everything" (2016).
On 21 April 2022, she released the song "Te Felicito" with singer Rauw Alejandro, as the lead single of her upcoming twelfth studio album. In May, she was honored by the Ivors Academy in the United Kingdom with the Ivor Novello Awards' Special Award for Songwriting celebrating her songwriting in both English and Spanish and paving the way for Latin artists. By the end of that month, the dance competition show, Dancing with Myself, on which Shakira served as an executive producer and judge, alongside Liza Koshy and Nick Jonas, premiered on NBC. The series was cancelled after one season. In June, Shakira and Black Eyed Peas released "Don't You Worry" with David Guetta. In October, she released "Monotonía", a collaboration with Ozuna, as the second single of her forthcoming album. The following month, Shakira, along with Alejandro, was nominated for Record of the Year with "Te Felicito" at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards.
On 11 January 2023, Shakira released the single "Shakira: Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", a collaboration with Argentine DJ Bizarrap. The single reached number-one in 16 countries, achieved 14 Guinness World Records, and peaked at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Shakira's fifth top ten in the US and her first in over 15 years, since "Beautiful Liar" (2007). She became the first woman in US history to debut a Spanish language-track in the top ten of the chart. The song reached number two on the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excl. US. A diss track aimed at Shakira's ex-partner, Spanish footballer Gerard Piqué, "Vol. 53" achieved record-breaking success on streaming services, and had a measurable cultural impact. On 24 February 2023, Karol G's single ″TQG″ with Shakira was released. It became Shakira's sixth top-ten, second top-ten of 2023, and highest-debuting single in the US, at number 7. It broke the Guinness World Record for the highest-charting Spanish-language track by a woman in the US. The song debuted atop the Global 200, becoming both her and Karol G's first number-one. Shakira released "Acróstico" on 11 May as the fifth single from her upcoming album. A second version of the song featuring vocals from her children Milan and Sasha, was released three days later. In June, "Copa Vacía" with Colombian singer Manuel Turizo followed as the next single of the record. The following month, on the issue dated 29 July 2023, Shakira became the first woman in history to occupy the top three spots on the Latin Pop Airplay chart—with "TQG" at the summit, and "Acróstico" and "Copa Vacía" at numbers two and three. She released "El Jefe", a collaboration with American regional Mexican band Fuerza Regida, in September as the seventh single of her forthcoming album. On 12 September, Shakira received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards and performed a medley of her hits as the recipient; she became the first South American artist to receive the accolade. At the 24th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, she received seven nominations, including Record of the Year and Song of the Year. Shakira became the first artist in the award show's history to receive three nominations for Song of the Year in a single ceremony—with "Shakira: Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53", "TQG", and "Acróstico". She won Song of the Year and Best Pop Song for "Vol. 53" and Best Urban/Fusion Performance for "TQG".
Shakira's twelfth studio album, Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran, was released on 22 March 2024, through Sony Music Latin. Her first studio release in nearly seven years, after El Dorado (2017), she called the creative process "alchemical" and that it turned her "tears into diamonds" and her "vulnerability into strength". The album received generally positive reviews from music critics. Rolling Stone noted that "in a crowded Latin music landscape, Shakira's first album in 7 years reaffirms her relevance and dominance" while The New York Times wrote that the record continues her "career-long penchant for pulling together music and collaborators from across the Americas". It debuted at number 13 on the US Billboard 200, with 34,000 album-equivalent units sold during its first week. Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran debuted atop the Top Latin Albums and Top Latin Pop Albums charts, making Shakira the first woman with number-one albums across four decades on the Billboard Latin album charts. It was certified seven-times platinum (Latin) upon release. "Puntería" with Cardi B was released as the eighth single in tandem with the album. It reached number one on the Latin Airplay chart and topped the Latin Pop Airplay chart for nine weeks. "(Entre Paréntesis)" with regional Mexican band Grupo Frontera was issued as the ninth and final single from the record, on 25 March. The song reached the summit of the Latin Airplay and Regional Mexican Airplay charts, extending Shakira's record as the woman with the most leaders on the former chart (23) and earning her first chart-topper on the latter. To commemorate the album's release, she conducted a free pop-up concert on 26 March in Times Square, which was announced hours prior to its start. In April, she joined Bizarrap onstage, as a surprise guest, during his set at 2024 Coachella, to perform their collaborations "La Fuerte" and "Shakira: Bzrp Music Sessions, Vol. 53". At his set, she announced the Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran World Tour, her first tour in over six years, in support of the album. A variety of Latin ticket sales and concert records have already been broken and Shakira expects the tour to be the greatest in her career. The tour starts on 11 February 2025 in Rio de Janeiro; the last scheduled concert, as of February 2025, takes place on 30 June 2025 in San Francisco.
In September 2024, Shakira walked off stage mid-performance at the LIV Miami nightclub, reportedly after noticing fans filming up her dress. Later that month, she released the single "Soltera". Topping the Latin Pop Airplay chart for seven weeks and reaching number two on Latin Airplay, it tied her with Enrique Iglesias for the most number-ones on the former and third-most top-tens on the latter chart. Shakira received three nominations at the 25th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year for Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran and Song of the Year for "(Entre Paréntesis)". Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran has also been nominated for Best Latin Pop Album at the upcoming 67th Annual Grammy Awards. Shakira will reprise her voice role as Gazelle and write a new song for Zootopia 2, which will be released in November 2025.
At the February 2025 Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles, Shakira, in final stages of preparations for her Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran World Tour, received the Latin Grammy for the album. She gave a memorable performance and dedicated the award on stage to her "brothers and sisters", immigrants in the United States. At the Grammys she was accompanied by her sons, Milan and Sasha.


== Artistry ==
On her music, Shakira has said that, "my music, I think, is a fusion of many different elements. And I'm always experimenting. So I try not to limit myself, or put myself in a category, or... be the architect of my own jail." Shakira has frequently stated she is inspired by oriental music and Indian music, which influenced many of her earlier works. She has also been influenced by her Arab heritage, which was a major inspiration for her breakthrough world hit "Ojos Así". She told Portuguese TV, "Many of my movements belong to Arab culture." She also cites her parents as having been major contributors to her musical style. She is also strongly influenced by Andean music and South American folk music, using her native instrumentation for her Latin dance-pop songs.
Her earlier Spanish albums, including Pies Descalzos and Dónde Están los Ladrones? were a mix of folk music and Latin rock.
Her cross-over English album, Laundry Service and later albums were influenced by pop rock and pop Latino. "Laundry Service" is primarily a pop rock album, but also draws influences from a variety of musical genres. The singer credited this to her mixed ethnicity, saying: "I am a fusion. That's my persona. I'm a fusion between black and white, between pop and rock, between cultures – between my Lebanese father and my mother's Spanish blood, the Colombian folklore and Arab dance I love and American music."
The Arabian and Middle Eastern music elements that exerted a high influence on Dónde Están los Ladrones? are also present in Laundry Service, most prominently on "Eyes Like Yours"/"Ojos Así". Musical styles from different South American countries surface on the album. Tango, a style of fast-paced ballroom dance that originated in Argentina, is evident on "Objection (Tango)", which also combines elements of rock and roll. The uptempo track features a guitar solo and a bridge in which Shakira delivers rap-like vocals.
She Wolf is primarily an electropop album that combines influences from the musical styles of various countries and regions, like Africa, Colombia, India, and the Middle East. Shakira termed the album as a "sonic experimental trip", and said that she researched folk music from different countries in order to "combine electronics with world sounds, tambourines, clarinets, oriental and Hindu music, dancehall, etc." Her 2010 album, Sale el Sol, is a return to her beginnings containing ballads, rock songs, and Latin dance songs like "Loca". In 2017, Deutsche Welle's journalist Kate Müser commented on Shakira's "globalized sound": "[her] Latin beats, spiced with Middle Eastern and other world elements and made comfortably familiar by being churned through the pop machine, make you feel like a citizen of the world."


=== Influences ===

As a child, Shakira was influenced by rock music, listening heavily to rock bands like Led Zeppelin, the Beatles, Nirvana, the Police and U2, while her other influences included Gloria Estefan, Madonna, Sheryl Crow, Alanis Morissette, Marc Anthony, Meredith Brooks, and the Cure. She cited Depeche Mode's "Enjoy the Silence" as the song that first sparked her passion for pop music.


=== Dance ===
Shakira is well known for her dancing in her music videos and concerts. Her distinctive dancing style is said to combine Latin dancing with Middle Eastern belly dancing, which is derived from her Lebanese heritage, and her hip shaking is mentioned in songs, such as Fifth Harmony's "Brave Honest Beautiful". She is noted for usually employing minimal production, usually taking the stage with minimal makeup and natural hair, and without background dancers in her performances, preferring to focus on her vocals, dance moves, and stage presence. She often performs barefoot, a form of dance she learned as a young teen to overcome her shyness. She also mentioned in an MTV interview that she learned how to belly dance by trying to flip a coin with her belly.


=== Singing ===
Shakira is a contralto and is known for her "unique and mesmerizing" singing voice which includes her "trademark" yodeling. Ted Kessler of The Observer described her as having "the range of an operatic diva".


== Legacy and impact ==

Shakira is a prominent figure in Latin music, commonly hailed as the 'Queen of Latin Music' for her successful crossover to the global market. The New York Times called her the "Titan of Latin Pop" for her unique and leading position in Latin music, saying: "Even as a new generation of Spanish-speaking artists are crossing over into American music's mainstream, Shakira's output stands alone". A similar comparative perspective was made by The Independent, who named Shakira an "International Phenom" for her global appeal and sales statistics, further elaborating with "To put her in perspective, other Latin exports such as Ricky Martin and Jennifer Lopez are mere minnows next to Shakira, both selling half the number of records she does". Forbes has deemed Shakira as "crossover phenom" for her unmatched success of crossover and one of the world's most powerful Latinas. Forbes further listed Shakira as one of the world's most powerful female celebrities. AllMusic's biographer Steve Huey described her as a "Wildly inventive diva who created a cross-cultural pop sound rooted in her native Colombia but encompassing nearly every territory in the world. [...] she wrote or co-wrote nearly all of her own material, and in the process gained a reputation as one of Latin music's most ambitiously poetic lyricists." Her unprecedented crossover has inspired other Latin American artists to attempt crossing over, one example is Mexican pop star Paulina Rubio, having MTV saying "there's no question that Shakira opened doors in this country for artists like Rubio to succeed". Similarly, Spin credits Shakira to have paved the way for other Latin artists to crossover, naming names like Maluma and J Balvin. After the crossover, her global and mainstream presence became big enough for Time magazine to call Shakira a "pop legend". She was marked as "one of the most influential artists of the 21st century" by ET. Throughout her career, Shakira has earned several titles, including "The Crossover Queen" by The Economist, "The Queen of World Cup" by Billboard, and "Latin America's Pop Queen" by Pitchfork. Billboard has also noted that Shakira's music videos have "redefined the role of dancing in music videos", while listing her as the best Latin female music video artist of all time. The Middle Eastern newspaper El Correo del Golfo credits Shakira with "having opened the way" for several Hispanic singers today.

The authors of Reggaeton, published by Duke University Press, credited Shakira for popularizing the genre (reggaeton) in North America, Europe, and Asia, while the Public Broadcasting Service called her one of the three "most successful artists of the so-called Golden Age of Latin Music which reshaped America's cultural landscape for the twenty-first century".
Alongside her impact on Latin and mainstream pop culture, Shakira has also impacted popular culture in the Arab world due to her popularity in the region. In a publication titled Popular Culture in the Arab World: Arts, Politics, and the Media, author Andrew Hammond credits Shakira for impacting and shifting the images of Arab pop stars such as Moroccan Samira Said and Lebanese Nawal Al Zoghbi, saying "[they] have shifted their image and sound in attempt to follow in her (Shakira's) footsteps".
In 1999 Shakira's MTV Unplugged became the program's first episode to be broadcast entirely in Spanish. The concert is also noted to be the first time a Latin pop act attempted an Unplugged, as well as the first Latina solo act to do so. In 2001 Shakira's "Whenever Wherever" music video was aired on MTV with both the English and Spanish versions. According to a spokesman for the channel, this is noted as "the first time that U.S. MTV has aired a Spanish-language video". Following Daddy Yankee's "Gasolina" by five months, "La Tortura" was one of the first full Spanish-language music videos to air on MTV without an English version. In 2005, Sanz and Shakira performed "La Tortura" at the MTV Video Music Awards. In 2006 "Hips Don't Lie" was selected as one of the greatest songs by 21st century female artists by National Public Radio, ranked at number 65. "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" was named by Billboard the best and most commercially successful World Cup song. Published by the US Bureau of International Information Programs, the journal Global Issues (2006) cited Shakira as an example of a celebrity "in today's globalized world" who "made it big by sharing the uniqueness of their talent and culture with the global community". In 2020, The New Zealand Herald found Shakira's longevity in the industry "particularly impressive given her ability to breach the lines of crossover, a feat not many artists have been able to achieve". A similar remark was made by Paper magazine, when writing about Shakira's longevity and her being one of the few pre-digital era artists to successfully crack the digital-streaming era of music, penning "[Shakira] is a titan in the digital era of music where she devours billions of streams with her catalog".
In 2010, Google revealed that Shakira was the most searched female entertainer of the year. In 2020, Shakira was the most Googled musician of the year.
Many artists have cited Shakira as an influence, including Rihanna, Taylor Swift, Selena Gomez, Katy Perry, Christina Aguilera, Justin Bieber, Maluma, Ozuna, Ed Sheeran, Anitta, Cardi B, and many more. In December 2021 Shakira was named by Kiss FM as one of the most influential female artists of the 21st century highlighting her achievements in the international market.
Shakira has even received the admiration of intellectuals and writers such as Nobel Prize winner Gabriel García Márquez who has said "No one of any age can sing or dance with the innocent sensuality Shakira seems to have invented". Márquez wrote an essay exalting Shakira's "phenomenal musical talent", and "extraordinary maturity".
The newspaper El Correo del Golfo wrote that Shakira was the greatest exponent of Middle Eastern music in the West, citing her interest in Arabic music and dance.
Her influence has transcended the boundaries of pop culture, that she has become a socio-political influencer, and was named as one of the "World's Greatest Leaders" of 2017 by Fortune. The Guardian has written an extensive article about Shakira's impact on Colombia's social change, specifically in education, and her ability to discuss this issue with world leaders like Barack Obama, and Gordon Brown. Similarly The Independent has described Shakira as a "living proof that pop and politics mix" further noting that through her efforts and influence she is able to have "the ears of the global political elite".


=== Monuments ===

In 2006, a six-tonne (6.6-short-ton), 5-metre-tall (16 ft) statue of Shakira was installed in her hometown Barranquilla in a park near Estadio Metropolitano Roberto Meléndez.
In July 2018, Shakira visited Tannourine in Lebanon which is the village of her paternal grandmother. During her visit, she visited the Cedars Reserve in Tannourine where a square in the forest was named after her. The square holds the name "Shakira Isabel Mebarak Square".
In December 2023, Shakira's hometown of Barranquilla honoured the singer with a 21-foot bronze statue in a park along the banks of the Magdalena River. The sculpture shows the long, curly-haired singer belly dancing with her arms overhead in a sheer skirt with shiny aluminum decoration.


== Achievements ==

Shakira has received numerous awards and recognition for her work. She is the recipient of four Grammy Awards and fifteen Latin Grammy Awards—the second most for a female artist. Shakira has sold more than 75 million records worldwide, making her one of world's best-selling music artists. By the time she released Laundry Service in 2001, she have already sold 10 million albums in Latin America according to Billboard. Three of her albums are among the best-selling Latin albums in the United States: Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 (8th), Dónde Están los Ladrones? (9th) and Pies Descalzos (23rd); she is the female artist with the highest number of best-selling Latin albums in the country. Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 became the best-selling Latin pop album and the second best-selling Latin album overall of the 2000s in the U.S. Dónde Están los Ladrones? is also one of the best-selling albums in Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Mexico; as well as Pies Descalzos is one of the best-selling albums in Brazil and Colombia.
Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems said that "Hips Don't Lie" was the most-played pop song in a single week in American radio history, being played 9,637 times in one week. This song makes Shakira the first artist in the history of the Billboard charts to reach the number-one spots on both the Top 40 Mainstream and a Latin chart in the same week. Additionally, she became the only artist from South America to reach the number-one spot on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, the Australian ARIA chart, and the UK Singles Chart. Shakira is the female artist with most top-ten hits on the Billboard's Hot Latin Songs chart (37). Her song "La Tortura" at one time held the chart's record for most weeks appearing at number-one, with a total of 25 non-consecutive weeks (this record is currently held by the Luis Fonsi song "Despacito" with 56 weeks). She is also the act with most number-one songs on the Latin Digital Song Sales chart (18) and the female artist with most number-one hits on the Latin Airplay chart (24).
Nokia stated in 2010, that there were more Shakira music downloads in the prior year than for any other Latino artist in the last five years, and She Wolf topped the Top 10 Latino downloads. In 2010, she was ranked number five on the 'Online Video's Most Viral Artists of 2010' with 404,118,932 views.
In 2011, Shakira was honored at the Latin Grammys as Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year, and by the Harvard Foundation as Cultural Rhythms Artist of the Year. She also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 6270 Hollywood Blvd. Originally, she was to be given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2004, but she turned the offer down. In 2012, she received the honor of Chevalier De L'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. In 2014, Shakira became the first musical act to perform three times at the FIFA World Cup. In the same year, Aleiodes shakirae, a new species of parasitic wasp was named after her because it causes its host to "shake and wiggle". Forbes ranked Shakira on their list of "Top 100 World's Most Powerful Women" at number 40 in 2012, at 52 in 2013, and at 58 in 2014. In 2015 Time recognized Shakira as one of the most influential people on social media. Shakira and Argentine president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner were the only Latin influencers named on the list. More so, Time noted that Shakira has an "unparalleled platform" on social media where she promotes her philanthropy. In 2008, Shakira was named as the Honorary Chair of the Global Campaign for Education Global Action Week.
In 2018, Spotify included Shakira in the list of the top 10 most streamed female artists of the decade on the platform, making her the highest streamed Latin artist. In 2020, Shakira became the first female artist to have 4 songs from different decades to have over 100 million streams on Spotify, also marking her as the only artist with Spanish songs, the only Latin artist, and third overall after Michael Jackson and Eminem to achieve this milestone. In the same year, she broke the Vevo Certified Awards record, and set it at 37, becoming the artist with the most videos with over 100 million views. She is now worth $300 million.
In 2022, MTV included her in the list of "The Most Influential Women in the History of Music", being the only Latina on the list.


== Other ventures ==
Shakira has ventured into many other businesses and industries. She acted in the Colombian telenovela El Oasis in 1994, playing the character of Luisa Maria.
Shakira began her own beauty line, "S by Shakira", with parent company Puig, in 2010.
Among the first perfumes it released included "S by Shakira" and "S by Shakira Eau Florale", along with lotions and body sprays. As of 2019, she has released 30 fragrances, not counting deluxe editions. On 17 September 2015, she was featured as a playable bird in the game Angry Birds POP! for a limited time, and also in a special tournament in the game Angry Birds Friends after a few weeks. On 15 October 2015, Love Rocks starring Shakira was the first video game that featured the pop star.
On 14 August 2015, at Disney's D23 Expo, it was announced that Shakira would play a character in the Disney animated movie Zootopia; in it, she would give voice to Gazelle, the biggest pop star in Zootopia. Shakira also contributed an original song to the film, titled "Try Everything", which was written and composed by Sia and Stargate. It opened to a record-breaking box office success in several countries and earned a worldwide gross of over $1 billion, making it the fourth highest-grossing film of 2016 and the 43rd highest-grossing film of all time. On 8 November 2024, Shakira announced that she will return as Gazelle for Zootopia 2, slated for release in 2025.
In December 2021, it was announced that Shakira will be an executive producer for Dancing with Myself, an NBC dance competition series that aired in 2022.


=== Philanthropy, humanitarian work and politics ===

In 1997, Shakira founded the Pies Descalzos Foundation, a Colombian charity with special schools for poor children all around Colombia. It was funded by Shakira and other international groups and individuals. The name of the foundation was taken from Shakira's third studio album, Pies Descalzos, which she released in 1995. The foundation's main focus is on aid through education, and the organization has five schools across Colombia that provide education and meals for 4,000 children.
On 27 April 2014 Shakira was honored with the Hero Award at the Radio Disney Music Awards for her Fundación Pies Descalzos work.
In 2005, Shakira became a founding member of Latin America in Solidarity Action (ALAS Foundation), a coalition of artists and business leaders seeking to promote integrated early childhood public policies in Latin America and the Caribbean. In 2008, she served as the Honorary Chair of the Global Campaign for Education Global Action Week. Later, in 2010, she collaborated with the World Bank and the Barefoot Foundation to establish an initiative that distributes educational and developmental programs for children across Latin America.
Shakira is a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and is one of their global representatives. On 3 April 2006, Shakira was honored at a UN ceremony for creating the Pies Descalzos Foundation. In March 2010, she was awarded a medal by the UN International Labour Organization in recognition of being, as UN Labour Chief Juan Somavía put it, a "true ambassador for children and young people, for quality education and social justice". In November 2010, after performing as the opening act of the MTV European Music Awards, the Colombian singer also received the MTV Free Your Mind award for her continuing dedication to improve access to education for all children around the world.
In the Spanish edition of the magazine GQ, Shakira directed a few words to Sarkozy, "We are all gypsies". In the interview she made her viewpoint very clear: "What is happening now to them (the gypsies) will happen to our children and our children's children. We must turn to our citizens to act for the fundamental rights of human beings and condemn all that seems to us indictable", she declared.
In February 2011, the FC Barcelona Foundation and Pies descalzos reached an agreement for children's education through sport. Shakira was honored at the Latin Grammys as the Latin Recording Academy Person of the Year on 9 November 2011, for her philanthropy and contributions to Latin Music. Also in 2011, she was appointed by President Barack Obama to the President's Advisory Commission on Educational Excellence for Hispanics. The World Literacy Foundation announced Shakira as the recipient of the 2020 Global Literacy Award for "her significant contribution to the improvement of literacy for disadvantaged children around the world".
On 2 November 2018, during a visit to her birthplace, Barranquilla, for the construction of a school through her Barefoot Foundation (Pies Descalzos Foundation), Shakira spoke about the educational policies of the government under Ivan Duque (President of Colombia, 2018–2022). Speaking against the government's intentions to reduce the national education budget from 13% to 7%, she said, "This is unacceptable. It shows that instead of progressing forward we are moving backward. We need to invest more in education and we need to build more schools in places where there are none." She also talked about social inequality and unschooling. In 2020, Shakira was appointed by Prince William, Duke of Cambridge as a voters' council member for the Earthshot prize which provides 50 environmental pioneers with the funds needed to further their work in tackling major problems impacting the environment. In May 2020, Shakira donated more than 50,000 face masks and ten respirators to combat the COVID-19 pandemic in her hometown of Barranquilla. During the 2021 Colombian protests, Shakira condemned the violence and asked President Iván Duque Márquez to "immediately stop the human rights violations" and "restitute the value of human life above any political interest".


== Personal life ==
Shakira began a relationship with Argentine lawyer Antonio de la Rúa in 1999. In a 2009 interview, Shakira stated their relationship already worked as a married couple, and that "they don't need papers for that".
After 11 years together, Shakira and de la Rúa separated in August 2010 in what she described as "a mutual decision to take time apart from our romantic relationship". She wrote that the couple "view this period of separation as temporary", with de la Rúa overseeing Shakira's "business and career interests as he has always done". As first reported in September 2012, de la Rúa sued Shakira in April 2013, asking for $100 million he believed he was owed after Shakira suddenly terminated her business partnership with him in October 2011. His lawsuit was dismissed by a Los Angeles County Superior Court judge in August 2013.
Shakira entered a relationship with the Spanish football player Gerard Piqué in 2011. Piqué, who is exactly ten years her junior, and Shakira met in spring 2010 after he appeared in the music video for Shakira's song "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)", the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Shakira gave birth to the couple's first son, Milan, on 22 January 2013 in Barcelona, where the family took residence. Shakira gave birth to their second son, Sasha, on 29 January 2015. Forbes listed Shakira and Piqué in their list of "World's Most Powerful Couples". In June 2022, the couple confirmed in a joint statement that they were separating after being together for 11 years.
In 2020, Shakira announced her completion of an ancient philosophy course through the University of Pennsylvania, describing it as an impractical hobby of hers.


=== Tax controversy ===
In November 2017, Shakira was named in the Paradise Papers. It was disclosed that she was the sole shareholder of a Malta-based company used to transfer $30 million in music rights. Her legal representatives maintained that her use of the company was entirely lawful.  
In 2018, partly due to information revealed in the Paradise Papers, Spanish authorities initiated an investigation into Shakira's finances. Prosecutors alleged that she failed to pay taxes in Spain between 2012 and 2014, a period during which she resided in Spain with Piqué and their family. Shakira contended that her primary residence remained in the Bahamas during that time and that she was otherwise engaged in international touring. In July 2021, a Spanish judge determined that there was "evidence of criminality" sufficient to bring Shakira to trial on charges of tax fraud.  
In 2021, the Pandora Papers revealed that Shakira submitted applications for three offshore companies in 2019. Her representatives informed LaSexta that these applications were not intended to establish new companies but were part of the process of dissolving existing ones. They asserted that the companies had no income or activities and that Spanish authorities had been informed of their existence.  
In July 2022, following unsuccessful negotiations with the Spanish Prosecution Ministry, Shakira opted to go to trial to prove her innocence. Prosecutors requested an eight-year prison sentence for six alleged tax fraud offences. On 27 September 2022, a Spanish judge in Esplugues de Llobregat approved the tax fraud trial after prosecutors accused her of failing to pay €14.5 million ($13.9 million) in taxes. Shakira claimed she had already paid all owed amounts plus €3 million ($2.8 million) as interest. A trial date was set for November 2023, after the presiding Barcelona judge, Ana Duro, received the necessary qualifying papers from both parties.  
On 20 November 2023, at the commencement of the trial, Shakira settled the case by paying a €7.5 million fine. In a statement, she cited her well-being and its impact on her children as factors influencing her decision.


== Discography ==


== Tours ==

Pies Descalzos International Tour (1996–1997)
Tour Anfibio (2000)
Tour of the Mongoose (2002–2003)
Oral Fixation Tour (2006–2007)
The Sun Comes Out World Tour (2010–2011)
El Dorado World Tour (2018)
Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran World Tour (2025)


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


=== Film ===


== See also ==

List of artists who reached number one in the United States
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart
Best-selling international artists in Brazil
List of best-selling Latin music artists
List of best-selling music artists
List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists
Women in Latin music
List of Colombians
List of highest-certified music artists in Germany
List of largest music deals


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
VH1 Driven: Shakira (article)
VH1 Driven: Shakira (video)
"Video – VH1 – Driven Shakira (11–22–05)". ShakiraMedia.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
Book: Woman Full of Grace by Ximena Diego
"Shakira: Woman Full of Grace ~ Ximena Diego ~ eBookMall ~ eBooks". Ebookmall.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
Pareles, Jon (14 November 2005). "Shakira, from lip to hip". New Straits Times, p. L3.
"Shakira pertahan orang Arab". (8 November 2005). Berita Harian, p. 13.
Frank Cogan's review of Laundry Service for The Village Voice
"New York Music – River Deep, Freckle High – page 1". The Village Voice. 25 December 2001. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
Chart Performance for "Don't Bother" from the Billboard Hot 100
Chart Performance for Oral Fixation 2
"Building Album Sales Chart". HITS Daily Double. Archived from the original on 15 September 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
New York Times Magazine article on Shakira's philanthropic work on education.


== External links ==

Official website
Shakira at AllMusic
Shakira at IMDb