Kashyap Pramod Vinod Patel (born February 25, 1980) is an American lawyer, former federal prosecutor and official, and conspiracy theorist. He served as a National Security Council official, chief of staff to the acting U.S. secretary of defense, and senior advisor to the acting director of national intelligence, all during the first presidency of Donald Trump. In November 2024, President-elect Trump nominated Patel to succeed Christopher Wray as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
A member of the Republican Party, Patel was appointed senior counsel on counterterrorism for the House Intelligence Committee in 2017, as well as senior director of the Counterterrorism Directorate at the National Security Council in 2019. He worked as a senior aide to congressman Devin Nunes during his tenure as chair of the House Intelligence Committee. While working with Nunes, Patel played a key role in helping Republicans in the investigations into Trump and Russian interference in the 2016 election. Patel was instrumental in drafting the Nunes memo in 2018, which alleged errors in the FBI application for a surveillance warrant of a Trump 2016 campaign aide.
Patel has promoted several conspiracy theories and sold branded merchandise under the logotype "K$H". He is president and a board member of the Kash Foundation based in Alexandria, Virginia. He also owns the consulting firm Trishul.


== Early life and education ==
Kashyap Pramod Vinod Patel was born on February 25, 1980, in Garden City, New York, to Indian Gujarati immigrant parents. His parents first moved to Canada in the early 1970s from Uganda in East Africa, where they were facing ethnic repression. Subsequently, they moved to the United States and his father started working as a financial officer at an aviation firm. Having ancestral roots in India, Patel was raised in the Hindu faith. Patel graduated from Garden City High School on Long Island.
After high school, Patel earned a Bachelor of Arts in history and criminal justice from the University of Richmond in 2002. He completed his Juris Doctor at Pace University School of Law, New York in 2005, and obtained a certificate in international law from University College London in England in 2004.


== Career ==


=== Public defender (2006–2014) ===
After completing law school, Patel moved to Florida and was admitted as a member of the Florida Bar in April 2006. He spent the next eight years as a public defender, first in the Miami-Dade County public defender's office and later as a federal public defender. As a public defender he represented clients charged with felonies including international drug trafficking, murder, firearms violations, and bulk cash smuggling.


=== Trial attorney with Justice Department (2014–2017 ) ===
In 2014, Patel was hired as a trial attorney in the United States Department of Justice National Security Division, where he simultaneously served as a legal liaison to the Joint Special Operations Command. In 2017, Patel was appointed senior counsel on counterterrorism at the House Intelligence Committee.


=== Senior aide to House Intelligence Committee chair, Nunes (2017–2018) ===
In April 2017, Patel became the senior committee aide to House Intelligence Committee chair Devin Nunes. Patel played a prominent role in the Republican opposition to the investigations into Donald Trump and Russian interference in the 2016 election.
According to The New York Times, Patel was the primary author of the 2018 Nunes memo, alleging FBI misconduct in its application for a warrant from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) for electronic surveillance of former Trump campaign aide Carter Page. That claim was disputed by the committee's staff director, by a spokesman for Nunes, and by unattributed sources interviewed by India Abroad. Patel did not offer a public comment on the matter. The New York Times opined that the memo was widely dismissed as "biased" containing "cherry-picked facts", but "it galvanized President Trump's allies and made Mr. Patel a hero among them".
After Democrats took control of the House of Representatives in January 2019, Patel worked for about a month as a senior counsel at the House Reform and Oversight Committee.


=== Executive branch positions: Trump administration (2019–2020) ===


==== Senior Director of Counterterrorism at National Security Council (NSC) (2019) ====
Patel was hired in February 2019 as a staffer for President Donald Trump's National Security Council (NSC), working in the International Organizations and Alliances directorate, and in July 2019 became Senior Director of the Counterterrorism Directorate, a new position created for him. According to The Wall Street Journal, Patel led a secret mission to Damascus in early 2020 to negotiate the release of Majd Kamalmaz and journalist Austin Tice, both of whom were being held by the Syrian government. The negotiations were unsuccessful.


==== Informal Ukraine policy specialist role (2019) ====

Some advisors, including NSC official Fiona Hill, alleged that soon after joining NSC, Patel had assumed the role of an additional independent back channel for the president, while he was seen as underqualified for his portfolio, which covered the United Nations. Advisors such as Hill, who had an uneasy relationship with Trump, raised red flags when Trump referred to Patel as "one of his top Ukraine policy specialists" and, as such, wished "to discuss related documents with him". Patel's actual assignment was counter-terrorism issues, rather than Ukraine. He was thought to have operated independently of Rudy Giuliani's irregular, informal channel. Impeachment inquiry witnesses were asked what they knew about Patel. Hill told investigators that it seemed "Patel was improperly becoming involved in Ukraine policy and was sending information to Mr. Trump." Gordon Sondland and George Kent testified they did not come across Patel in the course of their work.
In an October 2019 story, Politico, citing an anonymous source it reported had formerly worked at the White House, wrote that Patel had "unique access" to Trump and had provided "out of scope" advice to him on the United States' Ukraine policy. Patel denied the claims and sued Politico for defamation, seeking $25 million in damages. The case was dismissed in April 2020 due to the court not having jurisdiction because Patel was not a resident of the state where the suit was filed. No money was awarded to Patel in that case. This was one of several cases where state residency became an issue for Patel. The case was referred the Henrico Circuit Court of Virgina, where it was ruled as a non-suit on March 15, 2022.
On December 3, 2019, the House Intelligence Committee's report included phone records, acquired via subpoenas to AT&T and/or Verizon, including a 25-minute phone call between Patel and Giuliani on May 10, 2019.: 58  The call occurred after Giuliani and Patel attempted to call each other for several hours, and less than an hour after a call between Giuliani and Kurt Volker.: 58  Five minutes after the 25-minute call between Giuliani and Patel, an unidentified phone number called Giuliani for over 17 minutes, after which Giuliani called his associate Lev Parnas for approximately 12 minutes.: 58  In a statement to CBS News on December 4, 2019, Patel denied being part of Giuliani's Ukraine back-channel, saying he was "never a back channel to President Trump on Ukraine matters, at all, ever", and that his call with Giuliani was "personal".


==== Principal deputy with Director of National Intelligence (2020) ====
In February 2020, Patel moved to the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), becoming a principal deputy to Acting Director Richard Grenell. Later that month, Patel was part of Trump's entourage during the state visit of the United States to the Republic of India and was noted in press reports as one of two Americans of Indian descent to accompany the president.
In October 2020, Patel provided incorrect information about permission from Nigeria for a U.S. hostage rescue in the African country. Despite Patel claiming the U.S. had clearance for the operation, the U.S. was not able to confirm clearance. According to the memoir, A Sacred Oath: Memoirs of a Secretary of Defense During Extraordinary Times, by Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper, Patel "made the approval story up". In the end, SEAL Team Six was still able to rescue Philip Walton who was being held hostage.


==== Chief of Staff to Secretary of Defense (2020) ====

In November 2020, Trump named Patel chief of staff to Acting Secretary of Defense Christopher C. Miller, a move that followed Trump's firing of Secretary of Defense Mark Esper. Patel reportedly argued that Esper was disloyal to Trump by refusing to deploy military troops to Washington to quell the George Floyd protests. Patel remained at the Pentagon for three months.
Foreign Policy magazine connected the move to Trump's "refusal to accept the election results". Based on interviews with defense experts, Alex Ward of Vox suggested that Patel's appointment was "not sinister", would "not change much", and may have served an effort to accelerate the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. According to an unnamed source quoted by Vanity Fair, Miller was a "front man" during his time as Acting Secretary of Defense while Patel and Cohen-Watnick were "calling the shots" at the Department of Defense. Another source told the magazine that Patel was the most influential person in the U.S. government on matters of national security.
After the November 2020 election, Patel reportedly blocked some Department of Defense officials from helping the Biden administration transition, according to NBC. As chief of staff, Patel was designated to lead the Department of Defense's coordination with Joe Biden's presidential transition, and also supported a departmental initiative to separate the National Security Agency from the U.S. Cyber Command.
Trump proposed Patel as a potential leader for either the FBI or CIA in early 2021 following the 2020 United States presidential election. Trump had considered installing Patel as either CIA deputy director or acting director, which would have required firing the existing director Gina Haspel. This proposal faced significant resistance, including from Attorney General William Barr, who wrote in his memoir that Patel would become FBI director only "over my dead body". In his last weeks in office, Trump planned to appoint Patel as CIA  Deputy Director, replacing Vaughn Bishop but interventions from Vice President Mike Pence and White House counsel Pat Cipollone stopped that.


=== Conflicts with intelligence agencies ===
CNN reported in January 2025 that Patel had for years clashed with the FBI and CIA, notably with regard to his handling of national security secrets, leading the CIA to ask the first Trump Justice Department to open a criminal investigation into his activities. The CIA alleged Patel had circulated classified information about the Russian efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election to government officials not authorized to see it, in an effort to discredit the FBI investigation of Russian interference. Patel denies mishandling classified documents and the DOJ referral did not lead to prosecution. Patel's FBI security clearance file remains flagged to indicate the CIA referral had been made. Patel was one of 43 individuals whose phone records were secretly obtained in a sweeping leaks investigation during the first Trump presidency. Patel has suggested the FBI should scale back its national security intelligence operations to focus solely on criminal investigations.


== Post-government activities (2020–2024) ==

Patel has widely been described by news organizations as a "Trump loyalist". Since 2020, Patel has invoked his association with Donald Trump into "enterprises he promotes under the logotype 'K$H'". In April 2022, Patel became a member of the board of directors for the Trump Media & Technology Group, owner of the Truth Social media platform. Patel promoted several pro-Trump conspiracy theories and appeared on podcasts hosted by alt-right personalities such as Stew Peters and co-hosted a talk show on The Epoch Times, a far-right Falun Gong-affiliated media organization. Patel also sold branded merchandise such as supplements that he says detoxifies the body of the negative effects COVID-19 vaccines.
Patel is the author of a 2022 children's picture book, titled The Plot Against the King, which falsely argues that the Steele dossier was used as evidence to initiate the investigations into Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections.
In 2023, Patel published the book Government Gangsters, a partial memoir that criticizes the "deep state". In his book, Patel wrote a list of 60 people who, he believed, were members of the deep state, which included: Joe Biden, Kamala Harris, Hillary Clinton, Merrick Garland, Bill Barr, Robert Mueller, James Comey, Mark Esper, and Robert Hur, among others.
On June 19, 2022, Trump sent a letter to the National Archives naming Patel and John Solomon as "representatives for access to Presidential records of my administration". In 2022, Patel created Fight With Kash, a tax-exempt 501(c)(3) charity, to raise donations for "helping other people" in need, though more specifically to bring "America First patriots" together and "helping fight the Deep State". Patel said he "funded whistleblowers campaigns", which Democrats on the Republican-controlled House Judiciary weaponization subcommittee said included former FBI employees the FBI claimed endorse "an alarming series of conspiracy theories related to the January 6 Capitol attack ... and the validity of the 2020 election". During a December 2023 appearance on Steve Bannon's "War Room" podcast, Patel concurred with Bannon's assertions that Donald Trump is "dead serious" about his intent to seek revenge against his political enemies should he be elected in 2024. Patel stated:

We will go out and find the conspirators — not just in government, but in the media ... we're going to come after the people in the media who lied about American citizens, who helped Joe Biden rig presidential elections ... We're going to come after you. Whether it's criminally or civilly, we'll figure that out. But yeah, we're putting you all on notice, and Steve, this is why they hate us. This is why we're tyrannical. This is why we're dictators ... Because we're actually going to use the Constitution to prosecute them for crimes they said we have always been guilty of but never have.
Patel's remarks came during concurrent reporting in The New York Times about "a series of plans by Mr. Trump and his allies that would upend core elements of American governance, democracy, foreign policy and the rule of law if he regained the White House". Axios reported days later that Patel was being considered for a top national security position in a second Trump administration.
In December 2024, The New York Times reported that Patel had made several misleading claims about his role in the 2012 Benghazi attack investigation while at the Department of Justice. According to current and former law enforcement officials interviewed by the Times, Patel overstated his importance in the investigation and distorted the department's broader efforts. While Patel claimed he was "leading the prosecution's efforts at Main Justice", officials said he held a junior position in the counterterrorism section supporting the investigation, which was run by prosecutors at the U.S. attorney's office in Washington, D.C., along with FBI agents and analysts.
The Times also reported that Patel's claims about the prosecution of Ahmed Abu Khattala were inaccurate. While Patel suggested Khattala would be released from prison before the 2028 election, Khattala was actually sentenced to 28 years in prison in September 2024 after an appeals court ruled his original 22-year sentence was too low.


=== Involvement in Trump documents investigation (2021–2022) ===
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) found in 2021 that Trump had taken  presidential documents with him to his home in Florida after leaving office. After Trump returned some documents, NARA found others were still missing, including some that were highly classified. NARA referred the matter to the FBI, and after requests and a subpoena to return the documents went unheeded, the FBI entered Trump's home under a search warrant to retrieve them. Patel publicly asserted that Trump had declassified broad sets of sensitive documents before leaving the White House. In October 2022, Patel was summoned to testify before a federal grand jury investigating the matter, but he declined to answer questions by invoking his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. Patel was represented in the matter by lawyer Stanley Woodward. The Justice Department sought unsuccessfully to persuade a federal judge to compel Patel's testimony. Justice Department prosecutors granted him limited immunity from prosecution, after which Patel testified on November 4, 2022.


=== Kash Foundation ===
Kash is president and a board member of the Kash Foundation, which became a tax-exempt 501(c)(3) organization in July 2022. The foundation website includes a link to an online store to products from Based Apparel, which is partly owned by Kash, with "K$H: Fight with Kash" products. Fight with Kash is also a website affiliated with Kash and the Kash Foundation and also has a link for the same Based Apparel online store. When the Fight With Kash website was first registered in September 2021, the registrants were the Kash Patel Legal Offense Trust and Believe Media, of which the CEO and founder is a board member of the Kash Foundation.


== Nomination as Director of the FBI ==
In November 2024, Trump nominated Patel as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to succeed Christopher A. Wray. If confirmed, Patel would be the FBI's 9th Director and its first Indian American leader, as well as its youngest director. Trump cited Patel's role in "uncovering the Russia, Russia, Russia Hoax" and his advocacy for "truth, accountability and the Constitution" in announcing the nomination. Following his nomination, Patel was targeted by Iranian hackers, who accessed some of his communications. The nomination hearing is scheduled for January 30, 2025, at the U.S. Senate Judicial Committee.
Two days before Patel's Senate confirmation hearing, 23 former Republican officials released a letter stating that his confirmation would be "a grievous mistake that would endanger the FBI's integrity and compromise its critical mission" because he is "motivated by revenge" and "has repeatedly vowed to go after individuals on perceived enemies lists. This is a vision of the FBI as an authoritarian weapon for pursuing his and Trump's grievances". The signatories included many Justice Department officials from four Republican administrations dating to Nixon. Ty Cobb, a former Trump White House attorney who signed the letter, said Patel "is not qualified remotely by character or experience" to be FBI director and he is "somebody who is a real danger to democracy and certainly a dagger in the heart of the FBI".
During his confirmation hearing, Patel denied being familiar with right-wing conspiracy theorist Stew Peters "off the top of my head", though he had appeared on the Peters podcast eight times. He strongly denied including an "enemies list" at the end of his book Government Gangsters, though the book named 60 current and former "Members of the Executive Branch Deep State" who are described as "corrupt actors of the first order". Patel was asked about a remark he had previously made about prosecuting Justice Department officials on racketeering charges "for criminally organizing the United States government to break the law to rig presidential elections". He declined to acknowledge making the remark, asserting it was not provided in full context. He similarly declined to acknowledge the remarks about going after government and media figures that he had made on the Steve Bannon podcast in December 2023. He sought to distance himself from a meme he had shared on social media of him taking a chainsaw to his political enemies, stating that he had not created the meme. Patel alleged Democrats on the committee were making "false accusations and grotesque mischaracterizations" of him.
U.S. Senate Democratic Whip Dick Durbin (D-IL) asked Patel about his music promotion of the song "And Justice for All", choir music from some of the incarcerated January 6th United States Capitol attack rioters (the J6 choir), which was a recording that Patel had co-produced, promoted, and sold. Patel has described the prisoners as "political prisoners". Durbin asked Patel:

Why are we so concerned about this choir singing a song? The question is who are you going to care about, who are you going to help? Are you going to help the victims of January 6—the police and their families, or are you going to help the people arrested for assaulting [the Capitol Police officers]? I think the J6 choir looks like a tribute to them—characterizing them as 'political prisoners' and unlucky and just patriotic people who may have gotten out of hand. Do you see the difference?
Patel had also produced a podcast with one episode called "What was the FBI doing planning January 6th for a year?". When Durbin asked Patel why did Patel state that the FBI planned January 6, Patel replied that he did not make such a statement.


=== Conflict of Interest reports to the committee ===
Although not known to the public until two days after the Senate committee hearing, Patel had filed paperwork disclosing his consulting firm Trishul, which had Qatar as a client. The company provided national security, defense, and intelligence consulting for Qatar until November 2024. Patel was a consultant to Qatar while he a national security advisor for the 2024 Donald Trump Presidential Campaign. His consulting firm reported business income of $2,114,251, and he has faced scrutiny for not registering as a foreign agent under the Foreign Agents Registration Act. He stated that he would not divest himself from Trishul, but Trishul will remain dormant if Patel should be appointed as director of the FBI. The FBI is a part of the U.S. Department of Justice, which is led by Attorney General Pam Bondi. Bondi is a former lobbyist for Qatar.
Patel was also paid between $1 million to $5 million in restricted stock in the Elite Depot Ltd., the Cayman Islands-based parent company of Chinese online discount retailer Shein. As restricted stock, the stock can be legally titled in the future to Patel, becoming the vesting to the recipient later on. The disclosure forms did not say how $1–5 million had been earned as unvested stock for consulting services.
After Patel's original financial disclosure or ethics agreement was filed, Patel had received  25,946 restricted shares at a value of over $800,000 (as of when reported) in Trump Media & Technology Group, which is the operator the Truth Social social-media platform and is majority-owned by U.S. president Donald Trump. Patel is board member of the social media company. Patel received the stock two days before the Senate hearing, on January 28, 2025. Patel's new financial disclosures are not at the moment publicly available from the U.S. Office of Government Ethics.

Approximately $200,000 (25% of the Trump Media restricted shares as of when reported) is accessible immediately, and the remainder of the restricted stock becoming available in a vesting schedule of installments from March 2025 through March 2027. Concerning the idea of Patel holding on to the restricted shares while working as director of the FBI, Kathleen Clark, a professor at Washington University in St. Louis School of Law, who specializes in government ethics stated that:It gives him a financial incentive not to take any actions that would undermine the value of Trump Media. That would include investigations.


== Promotion of conspiracy theories ==
Patel has promoted multiple conspiracy theories, and has been described as a conspiracy theorist. Conspiracy theories promoted by Patel include the deep state conspiracy theory, false claims about 2020 election fraud, QAnon, COVID-19 vaccines, and false claims that the FBI instigated the January 6 United States Capitol attack, claiming it was planned as long as a year in advance. He also claimed Democrats knew about the attack in advance. Patel promoted the conspiracy theory that Trump supporter and Oath Keeper Ray Epps was a paid undercover FBI agent who provoked rioters to enter the Capitol.
Patel has actively promoted the QAnon conspiracy theory. On Truth Social, Patel promoted an account with the handle @Q, which distributed messages related to the conspiratorial movement. According to Media Matters, Patel shared an image featuring a flaming Q on it and went on multiple QAnon shows in order to urge members to join Truth Social. Patel said in 2022 that Truth Social was trying to adopt QAnon "into our overall messaging scheme to capture audiences", and that the figurehead of the QAnon movement "should get credit for all the things he has accomplished". Patel has appeared on multiple far-right podcasts promoting conspiracy theories such as on Stew Peters, and appeared over 50 times in at least a dozen podcasts that have promoted the QAnon movement.
Patel has signed ten copies of his children's book about "King Donald" with the QAnon motto "WWG1WGA" ("where we go one, we go all"). He has also promoted the #WWG1WGA hashtag on Truth Social. Also on Truth Social, Patel has promoted the use of pills that, he said, reversed the effects of COVID-19 vaccines.
Patel has expanded on his view of a deep state in the United States in his 2023 book Government Gangsters: The Deep State, the Truth, and the Battle for Our Democracy, which Trump praised as a "roadmap to end the Deep State's reign".
Patel was paid $25,000 in 2024 to appear in a six-part film series entitled "All the President's Men: The Conspiracy Against Trump." The series was made by a company owned by Igor Lopatonok, a Russian national and U.S. citizen, who had previously produced films alleging deep state conspiracy theories and promoting narratives of the Russian government. The series ran on the Tucker Carlson media platform in November 2024, with Patel appearing as a supposed victim of the deep state.


== Litigation ==
Between October 23 and November 8, 2019, Politico published articles about Patel that Patel considered as defamatory. On November 18 of that year, Patel sued Politico in the Circuit Court for the County of Henrico, Virginia. The case was later ruled a non-suit on March 15, 2022.
On January 21, 2025, the court case Kashyap Patel v. CNN was decided by the Court of Appeals of Virginia. Patel claimed that Cable News Network (CNN) had slandered Patel in various news stories, with one news story claiming Patel was a back channel for President Trump to Ukraine in the course of events that were to become the First impeachment of Donald Trump. CNN was granted the motion of requiring the plaintiff to provide documents that pertain to the plaintiff's claim, or motion for crave Oyer in Virginia law. Some documents presented were the Nunes memo and the Trump-Ukraine Impeachment Inquiry Report (Ukraine Report). CNN knew Patel denied the claim, and that the Ukraine Report did in fact state the very allegations that Patel had contested. The court ruled that "Patel's bare conclusory allegation that CNN acted with actual malice was without factual support and insufficient to withstand demurrer."


== Personal life ==
Patel resides in both Nevada and Washington, D.C. He plays ice hockey and is a fan of the sport. In 2014, according to the legal website Above the Law, Patel agreed to participate in a "bachelor auction" of "very handsome lawyers" to benefit Switchboard of Miami, a social services organization. He later withdrew from the auction after noting that his Florida bar status was inactive at that time. Patel has been a regular guest on several podcasts including those hosted by Tim Pool and Benny Johnson, among others.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Appearances on C-SPAN
 Media related to Kashyap P. Patel at Wikimedia Commons