Quinyon Keaaron Mitchell (born July 18, 2001) is an American professional football cornerback for the Philadelphia Eagles of the National Football League (NFL). He played college football for the Toledo Rockets, where he was a two-time all-conference selection. Mitchell was selected by the Eagles in the first round of the 2024 NFL draft.


== Early life ==
Mitchell was born on July 18, 2001, in Williston, Florida. He attended Williston High School in his hometown and played football, basketball, and ran track. He won three letters at Williston and in football totaled 86 tackles, 19 pass deflections and eight interceptions in his career; he also played on offense and recorded 983 rushing yards and 11 touchdowns with a 9.5 yards-per-carry average as a senior in 2019. Ranked a three-star recruit, he committed to play college football for the Toledo Rockets.


== College career ==
Mitchell played all six games as a true freshman during the COVID-19-shortened 2020 season, totaling seven tackles. He then started all 13 games in 2021 at cornerback, totaling 34 tackles, eight pass breakups, one forced fumble and one fumble recovery, along with a sack.
Mitchell remained a full-time starter in 2022, starting all 14 games while posting 41 tackles, 25 passes defended (which led the country), five interceptions, and 3.5 TFLs. He was named the national defensive player of the week after recording four interceptions and two pick sixes in a win over Northern Illinois; his four interceptions tied the school record. He was selected first-team All-Mid-American Conference (MAC) and was a second-team All-America honoree by the Walter Camp Foundation.
In 13 games during the 2023 season, Mitchell compiled 41 total tackles, 18 passes defended, and one interception. He was named a semifinalist for the Chuck Bednarik Award, being Toledo's first player to earn the honor, and was chosen a first-team All-American, being the second back-to-back All-American in school history. He also was invited to the 2024 Senior Bowl.


== Professional career ==

Mitchell was selected by the Philadelphia Eagles in the first round (22nd overall) of the 2024 NFL draft. His jersey number was initially assigned to No. 30, but switched to No. 27 ahead of the regular season following the departure of Zech McPhearson.
During his rookie year, Mitchell was known for his consistent coverage skills against receivers such as Drake London, Ja'Marr Chase, and Mike Evans. Most notably, during the Week 11 Thursday Night Football matchup between the Washington Commanders, Mitchell held wide receiver Terry McLaurin to 0 targets, 0 receptions, and 0 yards. Due to his efficiency against guarding wide receivers, Mitchell has been nicknamed "Quintonamo Bay"; a reference to the United States military prison Guantanamo Bay, and his colloquial status as a "lockdown corner". He recorded his first career interception in the 22-10 win over the Green Bay Packers in the wild-card round of the 2024 NFL playoffs.


== NFL career statistics ==


=== Regular season ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Quinyon Mitchell on Twitter
Philadelphia Eagles bio
Toledo Rockets bio