Roseanne Park (born 11 February 1997), known mononymously as Rosé (Korean: 로제), is a New Zealand and South Korean singer and songwriter. Born in Auckland, New Zealand and raised in Melbourne, Australia, Rosé moved to Seoul, South Korea and signed with label YG Entertainment following a successful audition in Sydney in 2012 and trained for four years before debuting as a member of the South Korean girl group Blackpink in August 2016.
In March 2021, Rosé released her debut single album R, which sold 448,089 copies in its first week, the highest figure by a Korean female soloist. Its lead single "On the Ground" made her the first artist to top the Billboard Global 200 as a soloist and as part of a group, the first Korean female soloist to enter the UK Singles Chart, and the Korean solo artist with the most-viewed music video in the first 24 hours on YouTube. She signed with The Black Label and Atlantic Records in 2024 and released the Billboard Global 200 number-one hit "Apt." with Bruno Mars as the lead single from her debut studio album Rosie (2024). "Apt." topped charts in numerous countries worldwide including South Korea's Circle Digital Chart and Australia's ARIA Singles Chart, where it became the first song by a Korean female soloist to reach the summit. In the US and UK, Rosé earned the first song by a Korean female soloist to enter the top ten with "Apt." and the highest-charting album by a Korean female soloist with Rosie.
Rosé has received several accolades throughout her career, including five Guinness World Records, two MAMA Awards, and the Asia Artist Award for Song of the Year. She is the second-most followed Korean individual on Instagram and appeared on Rolling Stone's list of living icons from Australia and New Zealand. Rosé has been acknowledged for her role in fashion as a global ambassador for Yves Saint Laurent and Tiffany & Co.


== Life and career ==


=== 1997–2012: Early life ===
Roseanne Park , Korean name Park Chae-young (박채영), was born on 11 February 1997 in Auckland, New Zealand to South Korean immigrant parents. Rosé has an older sister named Alice. In 2004, at the age of seven, Rosé and her family moved to Melbourne, Australia. She began singing and learned to play guitar and piano as a child and performed in church choirs. She attended Kew East Primary School in Kew East and Canterbury Girls' Secondary College in Canterbury, Victoria, a Melbourne suburb, but dropped out before year 11, after signing with South Korean record label YG Entertainment.


=== 2012–2015: Pre-debut ===
In 2012, Rosé attended an audition in Sydney for YG Entertainment, a South Korean company whose label's music she already liked. She went at her father's suggestion and came in first among the 700 participants. She had initially presumed her father's idea was a joke due to the distance and difficulty of becoming a singer overseas saying that "she didn't think that there was much of a chance to become a K-pop star [herself]." Two months later, she had signed with the label as a trainee, and moved to Seoul, South Korea.
In the same year, Rosé was featured on labelmate G-Dragon's song "Without You" from his extended play (EP) One of a Kind (2012). Her name was not publicised at the time of release, her credit was revealed only following her announcement as a member of Blackpink. The song peaked at number ten on South Korea's Gaon Music Chart and at number 15 on the Billboard Korea K-pop Hot 100.


=== 2016–2022: Debut with Blackpink and R ===

Rosé trained at YG Entertainment for four years before she was revealed as the final member of the girl group Blackpink on 22 June 2016. The group debuted on 8 August 2016 with the single album Square One, which featured the chart-topping single "Whistle" as well as the single "Boombayah". In 2018, Blackpink signed with Interscope Records in a global partnership with YG Entertainment.
Rosé appeared on various broadcast programs, such as King of Masked Singer. Her vocal performance on the show was met with a warm reception by the audience, to which Rosé commented that she "didn't know if the audience would like [her] singing" and that she felt "happy and relieved" at the positive result. She later appeared as a performer on the second season of Fantastic Duo. The show's production staff stated that her appearance was intended to "reveal Rosé's vocal appeal, which is different from Blackpink". On 1 June 2020, it was announced that Rosé would debut as a solo artist following the release of Blackpink's first Korean language full-length album. On 30 December 2020, in an interview with South Korean media outlet Osen, her label revealed that filming for her debut music video would begin in mid-January 2021. On 26 January 2021, a promotional teaser of Rosé's solo debut was released, revealing that a preview of her solo debut would be revealed through Blackpink Livestream Concert: The Show on 31 January 2021.

Rosé's debut single album, titled R, was released on 12 March 2021. The album set the record for the highest first-week sales by a Korean female soloist, with 448,089 copies sold. With 41.6 million views in 24 hours of the music video for the lead single "On the Ground", she broke the almost eight-year record held by former labelmate Psy's "Gentleman" for the most viewed music video by a Korean soloist in 24 hours. "On the Ground" also debuted and peaked at number one on both the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excl. U.S. charts, the first song by a Korean solo artist to top either chart in history. These accomplishments led Rosé to be awarded two Guinness World Records, for achieving the most-viewed YouTube music video in 24 hours by a solo K-pop artist as well as being the first artist to reach number one on a Billboard Global chart as a soloist and as part of a group.
"On the Ground" was a commercial success in South Korea, peaking at number four on the Gaon Digital Chart and number three on the Billboard K-pop Hot 100. It also peaked at number 70 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming the highest-charting song by a female K-pop soloist and the second-highest by a K-pop soloist in the United States. In the United Kingdom, "On the Ground" became the first song by a female K-pop solo artist to enter the UK Singles Chart, with a debut at number 43. It debuted at number 35 on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 and became the highest-charting hit by a Korean female soloist in Canada. On 24 March, Rosé received her first-ever music show win as a soloist for "On the Ground" on South Korean cable music program Show Champion, and went on to win five more for the single. On 5 April, the music video for the second single from R, "Gone", was released. The song also performed well in South Korea, peaking at number six on the Gaon Digital Chart and number five on the Billboard K-pop Hot 100. Globally, it peaked at number 29 on the Billboard Global 200 and number 17 on the Billboard Global Excl. U.S.

"Hard to Love", a pop-disco solo sung by Rosé, is featured as the fifth track of Blackpink's second studio album Born Pink, which was released on 16 September 2022. Additionally, Rosé contributed songwriting credits to "Yeah Yeah Yeah", the fourth track of Born Pink.


=== 2023–present: Solo activities and Rosie ===
On 5 December 2023, YG Entertainment announced that Rosé along with the other members of Blackpink had renewed their contracts for group activities and that the members' individual contracts were still under discussion. YG Entertainment subsequently confirmed on 29 December 2023 that Rosé and the other Blackpink members agreed not to proceed with a contract with the label for individual activities. On 4 April, she released the song "Final Love Song" as the theme song for the survival reality show I-Land 2: N/a.
The Black Label, an associate company of YG Entertainment founded by Blackpink's main producer Teddy, disclosed on 17 June that they were in discussions with Rosé regarding an exclusive contract; it was confirmed the following day that she signed a management contract with the label. It was later revealed on 26 September that she had signed a solo deal with Atlantic Records. She recorded a cover of Coldplay's 2008 song "Viva la Vida" for the trailer and finale of the Apple TV+ series Pachinko's second season in 2024.
On 18 October, Rosé released the collaboration "Apt." with American singer-songwriter Bruno Mars as the lead single of her debut studio album Rosie. The song was a huge commercial success worldwide and became Rosé's second number-one single on the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excl. U.S. charts. It topped the charts in several countries including New Zealand and Australia, where it became the first song by a solo female K-pop artist to reach number one on the ARIA Singles Chart. The song peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart, marking the first time a female K-pop soloist reached the top ten. In the United States, it debuted at eight on the US Billboard Hot 100, making Rosé the first female K-pop artist to enter the chart's top ten in history. It also became the first song by a female K-pop artist to enter the top 10 of Billboard Radio Songs, for which Rosé won a Guinness World Record. By November 2024, the song's popularity resulted in Rosé garnering more than 50 million monthly listeners on Spotify, breaking the record for the highest number of monthly listeners by a K-pop act on the platform. On 22 November, Rosé pre-released her album's second single "Number One Girl". It was announced on 25 November that she signed a global publishing administration deal with Warner Chappell Music. 
Rosé's debut studio album Rosie was released on 6 December 2024, alongside its third single "Toxic Till the End". Rosie debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, for which she earned a Guinness World Record as the highest-charting female K-pop artist on the chart. It also debuted at number four on the UK Albums Chart, making Rosé the first female K-pop soloist with a top-five album in the United Kingdom. In Australia, Rosie debuted at number two on the ARIA Albums Chart and became the highest charting album by a female K-pop soloist on the chart. Meanwhile, "Toxic Till the End" debuted at number 15 on the Billboard Global 200 and number six on the Global Excl. US, earning Rosé her third top-ten hit on the latter chart.


== Artistry ==
Vogue has described Rosé's voice type as an "electric" soprano. Since her debut with Blackpink, Rosé's voice has received acknowledgement in the K-pop industry for its distinct vocal timbre and is nicknamed "the golden voice" amongst fans. Following Rosé's performance on Fantastic Duo 2, South Korean singer Gummy, whom Rosé cited as being a musical role model, complimented Rosé's voice for being "so unique" and describing it as "the [type of] voice young people love". After her solo debut with R, critic Kim Yoon-ha praises her memorable, husky tone that effectively conveys sorrow, aligning well with YG Entertainment's themes. She said that Rosé's delicate yet powerful vocal style transforms superficial lyrics into something profound, enhancing her dynamic presence in Blackpink and her solo work.
In a radio interview, Rosé cited labelmate Taeyang of Big Bang as a role model in her musical career.  Rosé' named American singer Tori Kelly as an inspiration towards her musical style.


== Media image ==


=== Endorsements ===

In 2018, Rosé and fellow Blackpink member Jisoo were selected as endorsement models for the Korean cosmetics brand Kiss Me. In October 2019, Rosé was announced as a promotional model for the Perfect World Entertainment's MMORPG Perfect World Mobile. In August 2021, she became a model for Korean unisex casual brand 5252 BY OIOI and contemporary brand OIOICOLLECTION. In December 2021, she announced her collaboration with the meditation and sleep app Calm, featuring her own bedtime story titled "Grounded With Rosé". In February 2022, alongside actor Yeo Jin-goo, Rosé was selected as one of the models for Korean retail store Homeplus for the brand's 25th anniversary promotions. In August 2022, Rosé became the global ambassador for skincare brand Sulwhasoo and starred in its #SulwhasooRebloom campaign.


=== Fashion ===
In July 2020, Rosé was named the global ambassador for Yves Saint Laurent by creative director Anthony Vaccarello, its first global ambassador in 59 years. She was the global face of Saint Laurent's Fall 2020 campaign. In January 2021, Rosé became the muse for luxury cosmetics brand Yves Saint Laurent Beauté. In September 2021, Rosé attended the Met Gala, a fundraising event held annually at the Metropolitan Museum of Art Costume Institute in New York City, as Vaccarello's guest. As a result, she, alongside rapper CL, became the one of the first female K-pop idols to attend the event. 
In April 2021, Rosé became Tiffany & Co's global ambassador and starred in its 2021 Tiffany HardWear digital campaign. She stated, "I've always loved wearing Tiffany jewellery. Being part of an iconic brand that has been part of my life for a long time makes it much more special to me. I am very honoured and excited to be a part of the HardWear campaign and I can't wait for everyone to see it." In March 2022, Rosé became the face of 2022 Tiffany HardWear campaign, having been photographed by Mario Sorrenti wearing a new necklace, bracelet, and full pavé diamond pieces. The following year, she was selected to star in the global launch of the Tiffany Lock collection. In September 2023, the collection debuted a capsule selection named the Tiffany Lock Rosé edition, paying homage to Rosé's name with its feature of 18-karat rose gold and rare pink sapphires.
In May 2023, Rosé made her Cannes Film Festival debut in Yves Saint Laurent. In September, Rosé, alongside footballer Kylian Mbappé and Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton, starred in Rimowa's 125th-anniversary campaign, "Never Still 4", as its latest global ambassador. In April 2024, she was featured in an editorial for Dazed Korea to launch Rimowa's Essential collection, consisting of travel accessories in its newest colours "Papaya" and "Mint". In June, Rosé was announced to be a global ambassador for Puma, supporting its "Redesign the Classics" program, which celebrates the sport brand's classic heritage as it takes on a new generation. Continuing her work with Yves Saint Laurent, Rosé was chosen by Vaccarello to serve as a guest juror at the 2024 ANDAM Fashion Awards the same month. In November, she and Dua Lipa were selected to headline the brand's Puma Speedcat campaign. 
In January 2025, Rosé starred in the 2025 Valentine's Day campaign of American shapewear brand Skims. In the same month, she was officially named as the global ambassador for Yves Saint Laurent Beauté.


== Other ventures ==


=== Philanthropy ===
During the 2019–20 Australian bushfire season, Rosé posted on Instagram urging fans to support relief efforts, providing links to organisations that accepted donations and explaining, "We can make a difference if we all join in. Please help to save my home country". For the 2023 Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit, Rosé spoke at a mental health awareness event in Cupertino hosted by United States First Lady Jill Biden. In her speech, the singer opened up about her emotional struggles and the challenges that come with fame, and advocated for the prioritisation of mental health just as much as maintaining one's physical well-being.
Rosé was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2024 New Year Honours for services to the United Kingdom COP 26 Presidency and advocacy for the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference of the Parties (being dated on 7 November 2023). On 22 November 2023, she was invested into this Order by King Charles III, alongside the other group members of Blackpink during a special investiture at Buckingham Palace, which was also attended by President of South Korea Yoon Suk Yeol. The Order that her bandmates received is only honorary, but that of Rosé is substantive as she has dual citizenship in New Zealand and is therefore also a citizen from a Commonwealth realm.


== Impact ==

Rosé is the second most-followed Korean individual and the third most-followed K-pop idol on Instagram behind bandmates Lisa and Jennie with over 79.7 million followers on the platform as of October 2024. Since 2018, she has appeared on the Korean Business Research Institute's female celebrity brand reputation list, a chart which tracks Korean celebrities with the most online searches and engagements, and previously reached the top 10. She was described as the "queen" among the most influential acts by The Times in a magazine article on the Korean Wave in music, fashion and television published in October 2021, noting that she "started as part of the girl group Blackpink and is now a fashion influencer in her own right, possessing universal appeal that spans every continent." Vogue praised her fashion sense, saying "each of the band's beauties has her own take on fashion, but even alongside her well-dressed peers, Rosé stands out." She was credited as the reason for the Yves Saint Laurent's Women's Summer 21 collection showcase earning 27.3 million views on YouTube, 11 million views on Instagram and Facebook, and 30.6 million views on Weibo in one day. The video of Saint Laurent's 2021 Spring/Summer collection reached 100 million views after she was featured in the video. Rosé generated a media value of $6.6 million with a post of her wearing a black Saint Laurent dress, the highest media value of any endorser. In 2023, Tiffany and Co.'s Tiffany Lock campaign featuring Rosé generated a media impact value of $1.3 million in just two days, with the brand earning an extra $585,000 from posting about the partnership.
In December 2023, Rolling Stone AU/NZ named Rosé in their "Icons Issue" as one of 50 living icons from Australia and Aotearoa who have broken boundaries and opened doors for others, factoring in talent, charisma, enduring influence, and an "unmistakable Antipodean spirit." In particular, they recognised Rosé's impact on the music scene, describing her as "an artist who represents the success of K-pop's crossover into Western mainstream music." Writing for Weverse Magazine, music critic Seo Seongdeok named Rosé one of the "pop queens of today", "without whom the pop landscape of 2024 would've looked completely different." Alongside the record-breaking success of her single "Apt." and album Rosie, he pointed to her exploration of universal emotions and relationships on the album in a way that avoided branding itself as K-pop, American pop, or any specific genre. This allowed Rosé to successfully position herself "as an increasingly resonant global pop star from Korea", while "her linguistic and cultural fluency only strengthens her appeal."  Outside of music, Rosé has been recognised for her advocacy efforts; the First Lady of the United States Jill Biden praised Rosé as "a global superstar who is using her platform as a force for good in the world." Biden said, "She's also an outspoken advocate for mental health, and has greatly shared her story in the hopes of helping others."


== Discography ==

Rosie (2024)


== Filmography ==


=== Television ===


=== Music video appearances ===


== Live performances ==


=== Music festivals ===


=== Award shows ===


=== Television shows and specials ===


== Awards and nominations ==


=== State honours ===


=== Listicles ===


=== World records ===


== See also ==
List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart
List of artists who reached number one on the Japan Hot 100
List of artists who reached number one in New Zealand
List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Downloads Chart
List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Pop Airplay chart


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Rosé at HanCinema 
Rosé at IMDb