Olga Kostyantynivna Kurylenko (Ukrainian: Ольга Костянтинівна Куриленко, IPA: [ˈɔlʲɦɐ kosʲtʲɐnˈtɪn⁽ʲ⁾iu̯nɐ kʊrɪˈlɛnko]; born 14 November 1979) is a Ukrainian-born French actress. She rose to prominence by playing Camille Montes in the James Bond film Quantum of Solace (2008).
Kurylenko had a successful modelling career in Paris before refocusing on acting in 2004. She had her breakthrough role in the action film Hitman (2007). She has also starred in the romantic drama To the Wonder (2012), the crime comedy Seven Psychopaths (2012), the science fiction film Oblivion (2013), the political satire The Death of Stalin (2017), the comedy The Man Who Killed Don Quixote (2018), the superhero film Black Widow (2021), the Netflix spy thriller miniseries Treason (2022) and the action thriller Extraction 2 (2023).


== Early life ==
Olga Kostyantynivna Kurylenko was born on 14 November 1979 in Berdyansk, a port city in Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union. Her father, Konstantin Kurylenko, is Ukrainian, and her mother, Marina Alyabusheva—who teaches art and is an exhibited artist—was born in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia and is of Russian and Belarusian ancestry. Kurylenko's parents divorced when she was three years old, and she was raised by her mother. Kurylenko rarely had contact with her father, meeting him for the first time after the split at age eight and later at age thirteen.


== Career ==

Kurylenko moved to Moscow at age 15. At age 16, she moved to Paris. In 1996, Kurylenko signed a contract with the Paris-based Madison modelling agency where she met her publicist Valérie Rosen. The following year, by the age of 18, she had appeared on the covers of Vogue and Elle magazines. While working as a model in Paris, Kurylenko supported her mother in Ukraine.
She also appeared on the covers of Madame Figaro and Marie Claire magazines. She became the face of brands Bebe, Clarins, and Helena Rubinstein. She has also modelled for Roberto Cavalli and Kenzo and appeared in the Victoria's Secret catalogue.
In 1998, she features in the music video of French Raï style singer Faudel called "Tellement Je T'aime".
One of her first acting appearances was in Seal's music video, "Love's Divine" in 2003, but her film career truly began in France in 2004 when she shot her first feature film, The Ring Finger, for which she received the certificate of excellence award at the 2006 Brooklyn International Film Festival for her performance. She next starred in the Paris, je t'aime (2006) segment Quartier de la Madeleine opposite Elijah Wood. That same year, she was selected to be the face of Kenzo's new fragrance, Kenzo Amour. She has appeared in all subsequent Kenzo Amour advertisements. 
Kurylenko quit modelling in 2006, after over ten years of working in the industry and moved on to acting.
In 2007, she starred in Hitman alongside Timothy Olyphant. She had a minor role in Max Payne as Natasha. 
She played Bond girl Camille Montes in the 2008 James Bond film, Quantum of Solace (after beating out Gal Gadot in the auditions). In the film she plays the role of Bolivian Secret Service agent Camille Montes, who teams up with Bond to stop a terrorist organization and avenge the death of her parents. Russian politician Sergey Malinkovich wrote an open letter to Kurylenko. In it he said: "In the name of all communists we appeal to you ... deserter of Slavic world. The Soviet Union gave you free education, free medical care but nobody knew you would commit an act of intellectual and moral betrayal and become a movie girl of Bond, who in his movies kills hundreds of Soviet people and citizens of other socialist countries."
She was featured on the cover of the December 2008 issue of the US edition of Maxim magazine and on the cover of the February 2009 issue of the Ukrainian edition of Maxim. In Ukraine the mayor of Berdyansk suggested naming a street after her in early 2008, and she and her mother met Ukraine's First Lady Kateryna Yushchenko in President Victor Yushchenko's family country house.

Kurylenko appeared in Terrence Malick's romantic drama film To the Wonder starring Ben Affleck and Rachel McAdams. The film was shot in the fall of 2010 in Bartlesville, Oklahoma. She also appeared in Oblivion, a science fiction film starring Tom Cruise and directed by Joseph Kosinski. Kurylenko played Alice Fournier in the spy thriller November Man. In 2014, Kurylenko starred in the historical drama film The Water Diviner alongside Russell Crowe (who made his directorial debut), Jacqueline McKenzie and Jai Courtney. She also played the headmistress in Vampire Academy. She later acted in films such as Momentum, Mara and The Bay of Silence.
In 2017, she appeared in Armando Iannucci's political satire film The Death of Stalin as the Soviet pianist Maria Yudina. The film was a critical success and starred Steve Buscemi, Simon Russell Beale, Jason Issacs, Michael Palin, and Jeffrey Tambor. The following year she starred in Terry Gilliam's epic adventure film The Man Who Killed Don Quixote (2018) starring Adam Driver and Jonathan Pryce where it premiered at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival. She also appeared as Baroness Roxane de Giverny in The Emperor of Paris, and as the Russian spy in the Rowan Atkinson led comedy film Johnny English Strikes Again (2018).
In 2021, she starred in the action thriller film Sentinelle. In the same year, she played Antonia Dreykov / Taskmaster in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film Black Widow. In October, she was cast in comedy heist film High Heat alongside Don Johnson.


== Personal life ==
Kurylenko acquired French citizenship in 2001, which she called "a practical decision" because it was easier to travel with a French passport without a visa, as opposed to travelling with a Ukrainian passport. In 2000, Kurylenko married French fashion photographer Cedric van Mol, whom she divorced four years later. In 2006, Kurylenko married American mobile phone accessory entrepreneur Damian Gabrielle, whom she divorced the next year. She moved to London in 2009.
Kurylenko has a son with her former partner, English actor and writer Max Benitz, whom she met in 2014. She expressed support for Ukraine during the Russian invasion of Ukraine.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Video game ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Olga Kurylenko on Twitter 
Olga Kurylenko at IMDb