Gayle Marie LaJaunie Bird Benson (born January 26, 1947) is an American businesswoman who is the owner of the New Orleans Saints of the National Football League (NFL) and the New Orleans Pelicans of the National Basketball Association (NBA). She became the principal owner of the Saints and Pelicans following the death of her husband, Tom Benson, in 2018.


== Early life ==
She was born Gayle Marie LaJaunie, the daughter of Francis J. LaJaunie (January 5, 1924 – July 18, 2010), and Marie Folse LaJaunie (1924 – May 30, 2010).
She grew up in Algiers, New Orleans, and attended St. Joseph, St. Anthony and Holy Name of Mary schools. She graduated from Martin Behrman High School in 1966.


== Career ==


=== Early career ===
Benson began her career in receptionist and secretarial positions while doing interior design before buying and renovating businesses with her second husband, Thomas "T-Bird" Bird. Following their divorce, Benson continued an interior decorating business called Gayle Bird Interiors, Ltd.
In the first ten years, Gayle and her then-husband Thomas Bird, renovated one hundred properties.


=== New Orleans Saints and New Orleans Pelicans ===
Benson became the owner of both the Saints and Pelicans following the death of her husband Tom.
Benson is one of ten female NFL owners, including Sheila Ford Hamp (Detroit Lions), Kim Pegula (Buffalo Bills), Carol Davis (Oakland Raiders), Denise DeBartolo York (San Francisco 49ers), Amy Adams Strunk (Tennessee Titans), Virginia Halas McCaskey (Chicago Bears),  Janice McNair (Houston Texans), Jody Allen (Seattle Seahawks), and Dee Haslam (Cleveland Browns).
Benson and Allen (Portland Trail Blazers) are two of five female owners in the NBA, along with Jeanie Buss (Los Angeles Lakers), Miriam Adelson (Dallas Mavericks) and Ann Walton Kroenke (Denver Nuggets).
Tom Benson had planned on bequeathing the voting stock shares of the New Orleans Saints and New Orleans Pelicans to his daughter Renee Benson, grandson Ryan Benson LeBlanc, and granddaughter Rita Benson LeBlanc.
On December 27, 2014, Tom Benson wrote an e-mail to his daughter and two grandchildren stating he wanted "no further contact with any of you." Gayle Benson was named his heir.
Tom Benson's daughter and grandchildren filed lawsuits challenging his decision to name Gayle his heir, questioning his mental competency.
Tom Benson was determined to be mentally competent and was allowed to change his will to leave ownership of the New Orleans Saints and the New Orleans Pelicans to his wife.


=== Labor complaints ===
Rodney Henry, former personal assistant to Tom Benson, filed a lawsuit accusing the New Orleans Saints and Gayle Benson of racism and violations of federal labor laws. The lawsuit claimed that Gayle Benson had treated him with disrespect because of his race. An NFL arbitrator ruled in favor of Henry and against the Saints on the labor complaint, awarding him overtime pay, a contractual payout for his dismissal, and attorney's fees; however, the same arbitrator ruled against Henry on the claims of racism.


=== Interference in Diocese of New Orleans Sex Abuse Scandal ===
According to the New York Times,  under  Benson's leadership "the Saints and the archdiocese (began)  working together to temper the fallout from a flood of sexual abuse accusations made against priests and church employees. The abuse accusations, which span decades, have led to dozens of civil lawsuits and out-of-court settlements, more than 600 claims of abuse in the archdiocese’s ongoing bankruptcy case and a handful of criminal convictions, and are part of an international reckoning for the church" 
The efforts included  "working closely with the archdiocese in attempting to solicit positive media coverage of the church and burnish the image of Archbishop Aymond, even writing talking points for him..


=== Dixie Brewing Company, LLC ===
In July 2017, it was announced that Tom and Gayle Benson had finalized an agreement to buy a majority share of Dixie Brewing Co. The company's brewery plant had been damaged and closed after Hurricane Katrina. On August 7, 2018, Benson announced, with New Orleans Mayor LaToya Cantrell, that Dixie Brewery would open a distribution center at the old MacFrugal's Distribution Center in New Orleans East.


== Thoroughbred Racing ==
G M B Racing is the thoroughbred racing stable of Gayle Benson, who owned 2016 Kentucky Derby starters Mo Tom and Tom's Ready and owned 2018 contender Lone Sailor. Tom's Ready was a fine sprinter in mid-2016, winning both the Grade 2 Woody Stephens Stakes at Belmont Park and the Ack Ack Stakes at Churchill Downs.


== Personal life ==
Benson has been married three times. Her first marriage was to Nace Anthony Salomone, on April 8, 1967, which ended in a divorce and annulment in 1972. Her second marriage was to Thomas "T-Bird" Bird, on February 14, 1977, in South Pass, Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana, which ended in a divorce on June 25, 1987.
Gayle's third marriage was to Tom Benson, on October 29, 2004, in San Antonio, Texas. They met at St. Louis Cathedral in New Orleans at a mass. They were married until his death in 2018.
On October 22, 2014, Gayle Benson and her husband commemorated their tenth anniversary by renewing their wedding vows at St. Louis Cathedral.


== Philanthropy ==
While married, Gayle and Tom Benson funded the construction of the Gayle and Tom Benson Stadium at the University of the Incarnate Word in San Antonio, which opened on campus on September 1, 2008.
In January 2012, Benson and her husband were awarded the Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice for their service to Catholic Church by Pope Benedict XVI.
In November 2012, Gayle Benson and her husband, Tom, donated $7.5 million towards the construction of Tulane University's Yulman Stadium. The playing surface is known as Benson Field.
In 2015, the Benson family gave $20 million for cancer care and research.
In February 2019, the Gayle and Tom Benson Charitable Trust donated $5 million to Jesuit High School.
In March 2019, the Gayle and Tom Benson Charitable Trust donated $3.5 million to Second Harvest
In September 2019, the Gayle and Tom Benson Charitable Trust donated $1 million to the campaign of Children's of Mississippi to build a playground at the University of Mississippi Medical Center.
In December 2023, Ochsner Health System announced it would be constructing a new, standalone children's hospital with a significant donation from Gayle Benson. The 343,000-square-feet facility will be named The Gayle and Tom Benson Ochsner Children's Hospital.


== References ==


== References continued ==