Lindy Li (born December 12, 1991) is an American political commentator and campaign advisor who served as the Women's co-chair and Mid-Atlantic Regional Chair at the Democratic National Committee. Now a conservative, she served on the Asian American outreach team for the Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign. Once a vocal defender of the Biden administration, Li became a critic of the Democratic Party after the 2024 United States presidential election.
Li serves as a political contributor for NBC News, Fox News, and MSNBC. Li hosted a weekly TV series, Listening with Lindy Li, in 2018 which aired on cable television in the Philadelphia area.


== Early life and education ==
Lindy Li was born in Chengdu, Sichuan, China on December 12, 1991, moved to Sheffield, England, at age three, and immigrated with her family to the United States when she was five. Her grandparents were illiterate farmers and her great-grandfather was killed by Chinese Communist Party adherents. Li spent much of her childhood in Malvern, Pennsylvania and attended public school there, until she transferred to the Agnes Irwin School, a private college-preparatory day school for girls, under a scholarship, graduating in 2008. In high school, she was involved in crew and ran cross-country and track. She describes her upbringing as strict, telling the Washington Post, “I was forced to play piano hours a day; I was forced to study.” “I did everything I could, because I was terrified about getting into college.”
Her father is a real estate executive and property owner; her mother is involved in the church. Li has a younger brother named Jeffrey. In high school, Li interned for Pennsylvania congressman and 2020 presidential candidate, Joe Sestak.
Li attended Princeton University and was elected class vice president at age 17, but when the sitting class president left the school, another election was held and she was elected to president. Li retained the title of class president for the remainder of her tenure at Princeton. She became the first woman at Princeton to hold the position of class president for all four years. There, she started the "Do It In the Dark" campaign, which encouraged students across campus to reduce their carbon footprint. She wrote her senior thesis on the ethics of climate change legislation and graduated in 2012 with a philosophy degree. At Commencement, Li addressed Princeton's graduating Class of 2012 as their four-time Class President.


== Career ==
Before entering politics, Li worked as a financial analyst for Merck and Morgan Stanley. Of this decision, she told the Washington Post in 2015, “At Princeton, all of us go into Wall Street,” she explains. “We have so much to offer society, but we’re enticed by these ephemeral and meaningless ups. It's sad that so many of us have lost touch with the ideals we brought into college.”
In 2016, at 25, Li became a candidate for Pennsylvania's 7th congressional district becoming the youngest female congressional candidate in U.S. history. Three months before the Democratic primary, she transferred her candidacy to the 6th congressional district, citing advice from party leaders. Li withdrew her candidacy in April 2016, after a court challenge that Li did not have enough signatures from registered Democrats in her own district.
In 2018, Li was one of ten candidates competing in the Democratic primary for Delaware County, Pennsylvania's 5th congressional district. She received support from Dianne Feinstein and her husband Richard Blum. During this campaign, Li described herself as a "tree-hugging progressive" who supported the legalization of marijuana, a national jobs guarantee, and opposed foreign policy interventionism. The 2018 Democratic primary was won by Mary Gay Scanlon: 28.4% to 7.0%.
Li serves as a political contributor for NBC News and MSNBC. Li also hosted a weekly TV series, Listening with Lindy Li, which aired on cable television in the Philadelphia area. On her show she interviewed various figures including members of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, the former CEO of Comcast, David L. Cohen, and others. Li was featured in a 2020 Fox News documentary titled My Socialism Nightmare.
Li previously served as the Treasurer for the Pennsylvania Young Democrats from 2017 to 2020. She resigned the post after conflict with group leaders over her Twitter posts critical of Bernie Sanders and his supporters. Li had tweeted a 2-min. video of Sanders from 1988 praising the Moscow metro: “#BernieSanders lavishes praise on Communist Russia, preferring the Soviet Union to the American way of life.” Li alleged her resignation was a real-life example of bullying by Bernie Bros; the club president denied this, saying that her resignation was voluntary. Vanity Fair also reported the resignation as voluntary.
After the 2020 Super Tuesday primary elections, Li appeared on Al Jazeera to debate Sanders supporter Linda Sarsour concerning which Democrat would be best to defeat Donald Trump.
During the interview, Li stated that she would not vote for Bernie Sanders if he became the Democratic nominee.
Alongside Aftab Pureval, the Mayor of Cincinnati, Ohio, Li co-chairs the Justice Unites Us Super PAC, a multimillion dollar political action committee that focuses specifically on increasing Asian-American turnout across the country, particularly in battleground states. In 2022, she was named by City & State Pennsylvania as one of the rising stars of Philadelphia. In 2022, 2023, and 2024 she was named by City & State Pennsylvania as one of the 100 most powerful women in the state and was one of the youngest to make the list each year.
In March 2023, Li on a panel on MSNBC said, "Let's also not ignore the fact that CPAC has become a gathering of sexual predators. Let's be honest” and "Tonight, we have Trump, a serial rapist...So, this is the party that claims to be the party of Christian family values, and I have nothing to say or do but laugh at that!"
In 2024, WIRED magazine named Li one of the top influencers shaping the presidential election. Li was credentialed by the 2024 Democratic National Convention as one of its official content creators. This marked the first time in history that top influencers were given exclusive access to the convention.
In 2024, after the US presidential election, Li transitioned from being a supporter, to being a critic of the Democratic Party. Li described the Kamala Harris campaign as a "$1 billion disaster," stating that Democrat donors were misled by the campaign to believe "that this is an eminently winnable race". In an interview on America's Newsroom, Li intensified her criticism, saying "I lost tens of thousands of followers because I dared to tell the truth. Because in a cult, you can't tell the truth. You can't ask any questions, but I'm done with that," and ridiculed the notion of Harris running for Governor of California in 2026. In an interview on Fox News, Li indicated she would no longer be supporting the Democratic Party stating that "leaving the Democratic Party or even questioning the Democratic Party is like leaving a cult. It's terrifying. I don't want to be a part of this craziness anymore.” Li also expressed support for fellow Princeton alumnus Pete Hegseth, Trump's nominee for Secretary of Defense, whom she had previously met. 
In January 2025, Li said, she "has been a conservative all my life."  When asked by the The Bulwark if she was paid for her appearances, Li replied, “I'm not going to discuss any conversations that I've had with private individuals, but I have not been paid a single dime by anybody for telling the truth,” said Li. “Not even a penny.” When pressed further, she clarified she was not currently “in discussions with any executives at Fox News.” Li later announced she was raising money for Trump and Republicans, despite having previously criticized Trump in harsh terms.


== Personal life ==
Li lives in Rittenhouse Square in Philadelphia and was close with Richard Blum, Dianne Feinstein's late husband. She is a runner and likes Taylor Swift. Li's candidacy for Congress in 2016 cost her a relationship.


== Notes ==


== References ==