Severance is an American science fiction psychological thriller television series created by Dan Erickson, and executive produced and primarily directed by Ben Stiller. It stars Adam Scott, Zach Cherry, Britt Lower, Tramell Tillman, Jen Tullock, Dichen Lachman, Michael Chernus, John Turturro, Christopher Walken, and Patricia Arquette. The plot follows Mark Scout (Adam Scott), an employee of the fictional corporation Lumon Industries who agrees to a "severance" program in which his non-work memories are separated from his work memories.
Severance premiered on Apple TV+ on February 18, 2022. It has received acclaim for its cinematography, direction, production design, musical score, story, and performances. The series received 14 nominations at the 74th Primetime Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Drama Series and acting nominations for Scott, Turturro, Walken, and Arquette; it won for Main Title Design and musical score. The second season premiered on January 17, 2025.


== Premise ==
Employees working on highly classified projects at the biotechnology corporation Lumon Industries are required to undergo "severance", a medical procedure that implants a device causing them to lose all memories of the outside world while working within the basement floors, and having no memories of their work while outside. This creates two separated personalities for each employee: their "Innie" working at Lumon, and their "Outie" living their personal lives.
Severed employee Mark (Adam Scott) leads his coworkers Dylan (Zach Cherry) and Irving (John Turturro) at Lumon's Macrodata Refinement Division.  Mark must balance the challenges of managing his department, including the onboarding of a rebellious new Innie, Helly (Britt Lower), and his increasing disquiet at the cult-like Lumon. Mark's Outie must deal with the personal tragedies that led to his decision to become severed, and the sudden overlap of his separate lives when mysteries from Lumon begin to intrude into his Outie life.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Adam Scott as Mark Scout, a former history professor and a severed worker for Lumon Industries in the Macrodata Refinement division, whose "Outie" is grieving the death of his wife
Zach Cherry as Dylan George, Mark's severed co-worker, who particularly enjoys company perks
Britt Lower as Helly Riggs, a new severed employee who replaces Petey
Tramell Tillman as Seth Milchick, the supervisor on the severed floor at Lumon
Jen Tullock as Devon Scout-Hale, Mark's sister
Dichen Lachman as Ms. Casey, the wellness counselor on the severed floor
Michael Chernus as Ricken Hale, Devon's husband and Mark's brother-in-law, an eccentric self-help author
John Turturro as Irving Bailiff, Mark's severed co-worker, who is a stickler for company policy and is drawn to Burt
Christopher Walken as Burt Goodman, another severed employee and the head of the Optics and Design division who is drawn to Irving
Patricia Arquette as Harmony Cobel, the manager of the severed floor at Lumon, who has another identity outside of work as Mrs. Selvig, Mark's next-door neighbor
Sarah Bock as Miss Huang (season 2), the young new Deputy Manager of the Severed floor


=== Recurring ===
Yul Vazquez as Peter "Petey" Kilmer, a former severed worker and Mark's best friend, who left Lumon under mysterious circumstances
Michael Cumpsty as Doug Graner (season 1), the head of security on Lumon's severed floor
Nikki M. James as Alexa (season 1), Devon's midwife and one of Mark's love interests
Sydney Cole Alexander as Natalie Kalen, Lumon's PR representative and speaker for the mysterious Board
Nora Dale as Gabby Arteta (season 1), the wife of Senator Angelo Arteta. She underwent severance to avoid the pain of childbirth
Mark Kenneth Smaltz as Judd, security guard at Lumon
Donald Webber Jr. as Patton, a friend of Ricken's
Annie McNamara as Danise (season 1), a friend of Ricken's
Claudia Robinson as Felicia, a longtime Optics & Design employee at Lumon who is close with Burt
Karen Aldridge as Asal Reghabi, a former Lumon surgeon who reintegrated Petey
Michael Siberry as Jame Eagan, the current CEO of Lumon Industries


=== Guest ===
Marc Geller as Kier Eagan, the late founder of Lumon Industries, who is worshipped with cult-like devotion within the company; he is represented throughout the series in sculptures, paintings, and recordings
Cassidy Layton as June Kilmer, Petey's daughter
Joanne Kelly as Nina, Petey's ex-wife
Ethan Flower as Angelo Arteta, a Lumon-backed state senator who supports legalizing the severance procedure and is married to Gabby Arteta, with whom he has three children
Grace Rex as Rebeck, a friend of Ricken's
Rajat Suresh as Balf, a friend of Ricken's
Bob Balaban as Mark Wilkins (season 2), a new member of MDR
Alia Shawkat as Gwendolyn Y. (season 2), a new member of MDR
Stefano Carannante as Dario Rossi (season 2), a new member of MDR
Ólafur Darri Ólafsson as Mr. Drummond (season 2), an intimidating Lumon enforcer who is involved with Severance operations
Sarah Sherman (season 2) as the voice of a stop-motion water tower in a Lumon industrial film.
Adrian Martinez (season 2) as Mr. Saliba, a manager at a door factory who interviews Dylan for a position.
Merritt Wever as Gretchen (season 2), Dylan's wife
Gwendoline Christie as Lorne (season 2), a Lumon employee running the Mammalians Nurturable department.
Ben Stiller has an uncredited voice cameo as an animated version of Kier Eagan in season 1. Keanu Reeves voices an animated Lumon building in season 2, uncredited.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2022) ===


=== Season 2 (2025) ===


== Production ==


=== Background ===
While studying English at Western Washington University, Dan Erickson became interested in the theater department, writing short plays and other creative works. Soon after, Erickson attended New York University, where he got a master's degree in television writing. In 2016, his screenplay for the pilot of Severance appeared on Blood List's survey results of the best unproduced genre screenplays. Erickson had worked in an office job before writing the show, stating in an interview, "The initial ideas came to me while I was working a really bad office job and going through a somewhat depressive state." Erickson said his job was so mind-numbing that he wished he could "skip the eight hours of the workday, to disassociate and just get it over with", which then became the premise of the show. Erickson is close with his siblings, stating they were inspirations for some of the characters on the show.


=== Development ===

Ben Stiller first read the screenplay to the pilot episode at least five years before the show premiered, calling it "the longest thing I've ever worked on." The script was submitted by Dan Erickson as a writing sample to Stiller's production company Red Hour Productions in 2015, and passed to Stiller by development executive Jackie Cohn. Stiller said he enjoyed the story's contributions to the workplace comedy. In January 2017, Stiller invited Adam Scott to star. Stiller and Scott had previously worked together in Stiller's 2013 movie The Secret Life of Walter Mitty. In November 2019, Apple TV+ gave Severance a series order, with Stiller directing and Scott cast in the leading role. Stiller was only attached to direct the pilot but he decided to direct several more episodes as the series entered development.
On April 6, 2022, Apple renewed the series for a second season. In April 2023, it was reported that Beau Willimon had been hired as an executive producer and writer for the second and potential third season.


=== Writing ===
Relatively recent media that influenced Severance include the online urban legend known as The Backrooms, the computer game The Stanley Parable as well as films including Office Space, The Truman Show, Being John Malkovich, and Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, and the comic strip Dilbert. Older influences include the existential hell in the Jean-Paul Sartre play No Exit and the totalitarian dystopia in the George Orwell novel Nineteen Eighty-Four. Aesthetically, the series was influenced by the films Brazil, Dark City, and Playtime.
Regarding the real-world influences of the show, Erickson remarked that "the same frustrations that led us to this moment as a country [United States] and as a world are the ones that I was feeling when I wrote this because I was working office jobs, and I was dealing with all these increasingly insane requests that are made of workers. This was born of that." He added that "employees are the ones who are expected to give and give and give, with the understanding that this is a family—you’re doing this out of love, but then that is often not returned by the employers in any kind of a substantive way".


=== Set design ===
Production designer Jeremy Hindle blended corporate looks from the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s for the show's distinctive look, and cited modernist architect Eero Saarinen as influential for the building design. This included the John Deere World Headquarters in Moline, Illinois, and the Bell Labs Holmdel Complex in New Jersey (the latter which served for exterior shots for Lumon Industries), both buildings designed as "work designed to do work" according to Hindle. The set designs of Playtime also served as inspiration for the internal sets. The main sets for Severance were created on soundstages in the Bronx. One soundstage was used for the hallways within Lumon, using around 140 feet (43 m) of hallway that they would rearrange as necessary, along with special effects, to create the maze-like structure. Another soundstage used larger hallways that were used in latter episodes of the first season. A second soundstage were used for main rooms like the Macrodata Refinement Division. This space was designed to create the feeling of being trapped, using a large room (80 by 40 feet (24 m × 12 m)) with a low ceiling. Hindle also felt this room was meant to be a playroom for the newest Lumon hires, and gave it green carpeting in contrast with the whites to make it feel like grass. Other spaces with Lumon were inspired by the works of M.C. Escher.
Erickson said the mix of cars and technologies from different eras was meant to "give a slight sense of disorientation" and make Lumon "feel unmoored from time and space". All the office equipment is labeled as Lumon products. The prop designers reconstructed old computers with functional trackball devices so the actors could actually do the work presented on the show in order to get adjusted to the office setting. These computers lacked an escape key, as a metaphor for the lack of control the Innies have while in Lumon's offices.


=== Filming ===

The COVID-19 pandemic postponed the initial production start of March 2020. Principal photography for the first season started in New York City under the working title Tumwater on November 8, 2020, the day after the U.S. presidential election was called. The opening scene of the show was shot on January 6, 2021. The series filmed for a few days in February in Nyack, New York for the homes of Mark and Cobel, and in Kingston and Beacon, New York in March. In April, filming moved to central New Jersey, mainly in the Bell Labs Holmdel Complex which stood in for Lumon HQ. Filming was scheduled to conclude on June 23, 2021.
The second season began filming on October 3, 2022, in New York City, and was set to wrap on May 12, 2023. However, on May 8, 2023, production of the season was shut down due to the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike. Production had resumed by May 13, 2023, with filming occurring in Newfoundland. Filming was later shut down again due to the dual actors and writers strike, but resumed on January 29, 2024, and wrapped on April 23, 2024.


=== Casting ===
In January 2020, Patricia Arquette, Britt Lower, Jen Tullock, and Zach Cherry were added to the cast. Tramell Tillman joined in February 2020, and John Turturro and Christopher Walken were added in November 2020. Dichen Lachman was cast in December 2020. Turturro said he recommended Walken for the role of Burt because he had known him for "a long time and I don't have to really act like we're friends."
On October 31, 2022, Gwendoline Christie, Bob Balaban, Merritt Wever, Alia Shawkat, Robby Benson, Stefano Carannante, Ólafur Darri Ólafsson and John Noble were announced to have joined the cast for season two.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===


==== Season 1 ====
Severance was met with critical acclaim upon its release. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season of Severance has an approval rating of 97% based on 117 reviews, with an average rating of 8.5/10. The website's consensus reads: "Audacious, mysterious, and bringing fresh insight into the perils of corporate drudgery, Severance is the complete package." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 83 out of 100 based on 36 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
The series received a rating of five out of five from Lucy Mangan of The Guardian and Rachael Sigee of I, 4 out of 5 stars from Huw Fullerton of Radio Times, John Nugent of Empire, Alan Sepinwall of Rolling Stone and Anita Singh of The Telegraph, and 3.5 out of 4 stars from Patrick Ryan of USA Today. In her review, Mangan praised Stiller's direction, the writing, and the performances of the cast (particularly those of Arquette, Turturro, Walken, and Tillman). Sigee also praised the performances, especially Scott's, Arquette's, Turturro's and Walken's, and wrote, "Severance moves slowly but surely, allowing time to absorb both the impressive world-building and stunning visuals, [...] [and] its breathtaking cinematography and design. With an exceptional cast [...], this is an original, weird, thought-provoking and beautifully crafted story that asks just how much of ourselves we should give over to our jobs." Fullerton also praised Scott's performance and called the series "an impressive creation". Nugent praised the direction, performances of Scott, Arquette, Turturro and Walken, and chemistry between the latter two. Sepinwall also praised Stiller's direction and the cast's performances (most notably those of Scott, Turturro, Walken, Lower and Tillman), in addition to the production design, tone, and season finale.
Grading the series an "A", Carly Lane of Collider wrote, "the most engrossing element of Severance is the many mysteries it presents, wrapped up in silent overarching questions of philosophy, morality, and free will versus choice, and as the series demonstrates, some of those questions aren't so easily solved, but some issues aren't as black-and-white as initially presented either." Also grading it an "A", Ben Travers of IndieWire wrote, "Whether you invest in the allegory, character arcs, or both, 'Severance' hits its marks. [...] Erickson and his writing staff deserve a ton of credit. The season plays out cleanly and efficiently; episodes range from nearly 60 minutes to a crisp 40; cliffhangers abound, but they’re earned. [...] This is serialized storytelling that knows how to make the most of its episodic format." Stephen Robinson of The A.V. Club gave it an "A-" grade and praised Stiller's direction and the cast, with the performances of Lower, Scott, Tillman, Turturro, Walken, Tullock and Cherry singled out. For Entertainment Weekly, Kristen Baldwin graded it a "B+" and highlighted the performances of Scott, Lower and Tillman, writing, "Scott is a superb fit for Severance's central everyman, [...] Lower brings an effective vulnerability to the acerbic Helly, and Tramell Tillman is an absolute force of charisma as Milchick."
Giving the series a score of nine out of ten, Samantha Nelson of IGN wrote, "Severance [...] uses a clever premise and excellent cast to set up an intriguing mystery that leaves plenty of room for the characters to evolve." Writing for Paste, Shane Ryan gave it an 8.1 out of 10 and praised the performances of Scott, Arquette and Tillman as well as Stiller and McArdle's direction. Kyle Mullin of Under the Radar gave it eight out of ten and said, "Severance's writer/creator Dan Erickson is another newcomer who pens scenes with veteran-level aplomb. Every scene is a Golden Age of TV gem in its own right. But Severance's dramatic heart resides at the workplace, where it also becomes a white-knuckle thriller. This is where director Ben Stiller especially shines, training his lens and setting the scenes [...]. He certainly brings the best out of his cast."
The American Film Institute named it one of the ten best television programs of the year.


==== Season 2 ====
The second season of Severance has an approval rating of 98% based on 116 reviews and an average rating of 8.9/10 on Rotten Tomatoes. The website's consensus reads: "Masterfully managing its two halves of adroit character study and surreal nightmare, Severance's long-awaited sophomore season makes cognitive dissonance a mind-melting pleasure." Metacritic assigned a score of 86 out of 100 based on 43 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Writing for Variety, Alison Herman awarded the second season with a perfect rating, noting: "Season 2 fulfills this sine qua non with deceptive ease. Real-time viewers have had their patience strained; future binge-watchers will barely notice a blip." John Nugent of Empire gave season two 4 stars out of 5, while stating: "After a storming Season One, Season Two expands and deepens the original mysteries while opening up new ones. Sharply made and skilfully executed, the employee benefits are there if you stay with it."


=== Critics' top ten list ===


=== Accolades ===

The first season was recognized with The ReFrame Stamp for hiring people of underrepresented gender identities, and of color.


== Marketing ==
The second season was teased during the Apple Event on September 7, 2022, which featured Helly (Britt Lower). The first footage from season 2 was released on June 10, 2024, as part of a promo for upcoming Apple TV+ programming.
On July 9, 2024, a post on the Apple TV+ account on social media platform X teased an announcement about season 2. In the video, a light appears to blink in Morse code and spell out the word "tomorrow." The next day on July 10, Apple TV+ confirmed that season 2 will debut on January 17, 2025. The first trailer for season 2 was released on October 23, 2024.

On January 14, 2025, two days before the premiere of the second season, Apple TV+ recreated the show's 'Macrodata Refinement' office inside a glass box at Grand Central Terminal. Actors Scott, Cherry, Arquette, Lower, and Tillman entered the glass box and behaved as though they were working their respective jobs at Lumon Industries for about two and a half hours. The pop-up's uniqueness and the cast's dedication generated largely favorable responses from the public.


== Home media ==
The first season was released in the UK on Blu-ray and DVD on December 2, 2024, in Australia on December 4, 2024, and in the United States on December 17, 2024.


== Other media ==
An epistolary novel related to the series, Severance: The Lexington Letter, was released by Apple Books purporting to be a "tell-all" exposé of sinister occurrences at Lumon Corporation, in the form of a dialogue between former Lumon employee Margeret "Peg" Kincaid and her Innie (work self), sent as a letter to a Topeka newsletter.
A fictional self-help book from the series, The You You Are, was released by Apple Books as an e-book and an audiobook, the latter read by the actor Michael Chernus in his role as Ricken Hale.


== See also ==
Cypher, a 2002 thriller with similar themes of memory erasure and separate identities in a mysterious workplace setting
Drug-induced amnesia § In popular culture
Mind control in popular culture
My Own Worst Enemy, a 2008 TV series about a secret agent and his cover, who has no knowledge of his own double life
Paycheck, a 1952 novelette by Philip K. Dick, that explores a theme of erasing memory of the time spent on a contract


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Severance at IMDb