Vidaamuyarchi (transl. Perseverance) is a 2025 Indian Tamil-language action thriller film written and directed by Magizh Thirumeni. Inspired by the 1997 American film Breakdown, It is produced by Subaskaran Allirajah under Lyca Productions. The film stars Ajith Kumar, Arjun Sarja, Trisha Krishnan, Regina Cassandra, Arav and Ramya Subramanian. Set in Azerbaijan, the story follows a man on a mission to rescue his wife after she is captured by a mysterious group.
Initially, Vignesh Shivan was confirmed as the director of Ajith's 62nd film, before he was replaced by Magizh. After it was announced in May 2023 along with its official title, principal photography began that October. Shot for the most part in Azerbaijan, with a short schedule in Thailand, filming wrapped by late December 2024. The film has music composed by Anirudh Ravichander, cinematography handled by Om Prakash and editing by N. B. Srikanth.
Vidaamuyarchi was initially scheduled to be released in January 2025, on the occasion of Pongal, but was postponed. It was released in theatres on 6 February 2025 to mixed to positive reviews from critics, who praised the lead cast's performance, visuals and action sequences, while the storyline and narration received criticism. It is currently the highest-grossing Tamil film of 2025.


== Plot ==
Arjun, originally from Chennai, works for a US-based firm initially in Tbilisi, Georgia, where Kayal was born and brought up. Arjun and Kayal, during a vacation with respective friends and colleagues, meet with each other. They spend the rest of their vacation together, and even start talking after their vacation ended. Arjun relocates to Baku, Azerbaijan for his job. Two months after, Arjun proposes to Kayal for an engagement, to which she agrees to.
Three years later, they arrange a wedding, and in the following months, Kayal eventually becomes pregnant. However, she suffers a miscarriage and the doctor informs Arjun that she will be unable to bear any children in the future. As a result, Kayal starts distancing from Arjun, causing a strain in their marriage.
Nine years later, Kayal reveals to Arjun that she had an affair with an unknown man named Prakash. Arjun appreciates her honesty and despite his suggestion on working things out, Kayal informs Arjun that she wants a divorce and would be staying at her parents' home in Tbilisi, to which Arjun requests her for him to drive her to her parents', as a last trip before separating after 12 years. Initially hesitant, Kayal agrees.
En route, they meet with a group of drunk youngsters, in which Michael is a part of, seeking trouble. Arjun tries to stay away from them and drives away. During a stop at a gas station, Kayal meets with another Tamil couple, Deepika and Rakshith. They reveal that they are on their way to deliver a package, under Rakshith's work, and eventually get going. However, when Arjun and Kayal are driving, their SUV gets an electric malfunction and stops on the road, which Arjun gets out of the vehicle to inspect. After a few minutes, they see a truck coming, which they try to stop, only to find out it is Deepika and Rakshith. They try to help Arjun and Kayal, but can't seem to fix it either. They eventually think of taking Kayal with them to a coffee shop nearby to call a tow truck, as there are no signals on the road, while Arjun stays and takes care of the baggages in the car.
After checking a few minutes later, Arjun finds out the problem and fixes it. He then goes to the coffee shop, where Kayal, Deepika and Rakshith said they would be. He arrives at the shop and start searching for them, but cannot seem to find them. He requests Jabbar, the store's owner, if he had seen his wife, to which he denies.
After several futile attempts to find Kayal, Arjun is later attacked by Michael and his gang and is interrupted by Rakshith, who is revealed to have kidnapped Kayal and Deepika, Michael, his cronies, Jabbar and the police inspector are all part of his crimes. Rakshith instructs Arjun to retrieve a hefty sum of money from his bank account and leaves him at the mercy of his henchmen. However, when Arjun hands over the money to Michael, he is taken hostage in their vehicle and is scoffed at.
Arjun then escapes their clutches and attacks them, this time taking Michael hostage, demanding where Kayal is. His interrogation is interrupted by a police sheriff who enlists Arjun as an outlaw. During the commotion, Michael escapes after shooting him. Arjun saves the injured sheriff and takes his car, and then leaves to confront Jabbar and his friends who then reveal that Rakshith is housed in a dilapidated factory with his gang where he is disposing off evidence. Arjun defeats his henchman and confronts Michael and Deepika, where Michael is inadvertently killed by a rotating saw. Deepika suffocates Arjun with a cloth, who takes a step backwards, resulting in them falling off the window. While Arjun escapes with few injuries, Deepika falls into an acid vat, burning half of her face off, screaming in the process.
Rakshith hears Deepika's screams and looks at her in shock and comforts her as she dies. Rakshith and Arjun then face off in a duel, with Rakshith initially gaining the upper hand. However, Arjun overpowers him and hangs him by the crusher, demanding Kayal's whereabouts in exchange to sparing Rakshith's life and not tell the police anything about it. However, Rakshith berates him and voluntarily falls to his death into the crusher. With no available leads on Kayal's whereabouts, Arjun desperately calls out for her around the factory premises and wearily collapses; he then notices two dogs digging through the ground and it reveals a trapdoor to an underground bunker. Arjun goes into the bunker and finds what seems to be Kayal's body, with the face wrapped in bandages, and hysterically cries on her death.
Later, when the police arrive at the scene, a psychiatrist reveals to Arjun that both Rakshith and Deepika were psychotic sociopaths in his asylum and had escaped custody, killed Deepika's parents for abandoning her at the asylum and established a crime syndicate where they abducted wealthy couples, separating them and killing the husbands and performing plastic surgery on the wives to be sold to the Russians and they had been doing this for over 10 years. Their initial target was Anu, Kayal's friend, whom Deepika had befriended at their local gym, but later switched to Kayal after learning about Arjun's wealth when Anu inadvertently tells her, unbenownst of her true intentions. Also, it is later revealed that Kayal is alive and is travelling with Arjun; Arjun finds her unconscious in the bunker. The psychiatrist tells Kayal that Arjun is the best husband that she could ever have, as he had forsaken his own safety to find her. Arjun's name is cleared from the outlaw list of charges due to him having saved the injured sheriff earlier.
When they reach her parents' home in Tbilisi, they are welcomed by her parents and Anu and then Arjun turns to leave. However, he is stopped by Kayal, who asks him why he had thought of saving her inspite of all that she had done against him, to which Arjun tells her that he still loves her. Kayal hugs Arjun and they reconcile happily.


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
After the success of Valimai in early 2022, it was reported that Ajith Kumar would collaborate with director Vignesh Shivan for the actor's 62nd film as a leading actor. Nayanthara would reportedly reunite with Ajith after she was previously paired opposite the actor in Viswasam (2019). Tentatively titled AK62, the production was reported to begin after Ajith completed Thunivu (2023). That March, Vignesh confirmed the project, also revealing the inclusion of composer Anirudh Ravichander. The project was funded by Subaskaran Allirajah's Lyca Productions, which distributed Vignesh's Naanum Rowdy Dhaan (2015). The company made a public announcement on 19 March 2022, confirming the project. However, the following January, Vignesh was dropped from the project, reportedly because Ajith was not impressed with the script after the director had developed it during the pre-production for six months. Vignesh denied this reported reason in April 2023, saying he was dropped as only the producers, not Ajith, were not fully impressed with the script.
Numerous directors, including AR Murugadoss, Atlee and Magizh Thirumeni, were reported to be in consideration for replacing Vignesh, with Magizh being the front-runner. In February 2023, it was reported that Magizh had flown to London, where Ajith was at the time, and narrated a script which impressed the actor. On 1 May, coinciding with Ajith's 52nd birthday, the production house officially announced Magizh as the director. The film's official title Vidaamuyarchi was revealed the same day. In July 2024, the film was reported to be an adaptation of 1997 American film Breakdown, directed by Jonathan Mostow, as there were previous reports of the film being so and many similarities in the promotional posters. The film's status as a remake was not confirmed until December 2024. During the promotions of the film, Magizh stated that Ajith suggested using the core idea of the source material, making Vidaamuyarchi his first directorial based on another person's story.


=== Pre-production ===
Pre-production began in April 2023. During the process, the makers scouted for locations and chose either Abu Dhabi or Azerbaijan. However, due to unavoidable circumstances, they choose the latter location. According to Magizh, the film was initially planned to be a quick-project, with filming being held from October 2023 and being completed by January 2024, and it being released either in April or on 1 May 2024, coinciding with Ajith's birthday.
In mid-February 2023, Nirav Shah was announced as the cinematographer, in his first film with Magizh and fifth with Ajith after Billa (2007), Nerkonda Paarvai (2019), Valimai (2022) and Thunivu (2023). However, due to personal reasons, he opted out during the film's shoot and was replaced with Om Prakash. Anirudh Ravichander would score the music, in his first film with the director, whilst Magizh's norm editor N. B. Srikanth was retained.


=== Casting ===
In addition to his usual salt-and-pepper look, Ajith would sport a full-black hairstyle for his character in flashback portions, with certain scenes shot after his weight loss regime due to his involvement in the 24H Series. Sanjay Dutt was initially reported to play the main antagonist in his second Tamil film after Leo (2023). However, Arjun Sarja was instead confirmed, marking his reunion with Ajith after Mankatha (2011). Arjun Das was initially reported to be considered for the secondary antagonist, but as he was allegedly unable to allocate dates for the film, he was reportedly replaced by Arav, who previously collaborated with Magizh on Kalaga Thalaivan (2022).
Tamannaah Bhatia was initially reported to play the female lead; however, Trisha, who would pair opposite Ajith for the fifth time following Ji (2005), Kireedam (2007), Mankatha and Yennai Arindhaal (2015), was instead announced. Huma Qureshi, who earlier acted with Ajith in Valimai (2022), was reportedly considered for an important role. However, Regina Cassandra was eventually cast in that role. In July 2024, Azerbaijini media reported that several local actors were a part of the film including Vidadi Hasanov and Javanshir Hadiyev. In August 2024, the production house announced the involvement of actors Nikhil Nair, Ganesh Saravanan and Dasarathi in prominent roles. Later, that December, Ramya Subramanian confirmed her presence in the film.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began with the first schedule on 4 October 2023 in Azerbaijan. Initially, filming was intended to begin in the first week of September 2023 but was delayed due to Ajith's commitments to his world tour. The makers' decision to shoot in Azerbaijan received negative responses from netizens as the country was then under civil unrest, particularly regarding the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict (2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh). Furthermore, it was also reported that the production would be put on hold due to the ongoing Gaza war, but despite such reports, production continued. Art director Milan died during the film's preliminary shooting due to a heart attack. Later that month Ajith urged to set up a medical camp in case of any similar emergencies. In early November, it was reported that the schedule had been completed.
A sequence reportedly featured Ajith in a racy car action sequence, for which he did not use any stunt double. In early December, the team returned to Chennai due to the ongoing war and border issues in Azerbaijan, but later went back to Azerbaijan on 11 December to resume the production. Nirav Shah was replaced with Om Prakash due to the former not being able to allocate dates to travel to Azerbaijan. Arjun joined the film's sets in mid-December. Trisha completed filming her portions for the film schedule by 19 December, returning to Chennai on that day. The schedule concluded by 29 January 2024 with over 60 percent of the production being completed. The concurrent schedule was set to be held in London by February, but was delayed due to budget overruns and plans to complete 40 percent of the film's shooting within a single schedule were initiated for cost control.
Production was expected to resume in the last week of May, but was delayed as Ajith had started filming for Adhik Ravichandran's Good Bad Ugly (2025) in Hyderabad. The team along with Ajith returned to Azerbaijan on 20 June for the final schedule. This schedule was held around 35–45 days, with the climax portions being shot in Baku. Ajith, along with Trisha and Arjun, joined the concurrent schedule for some important sequences. According to the head of Lyca Productions, GKM Tamil Kumaran, principal photography was scheduled to be wrapped by mid-August. However, as of September 2024, it was only expected to be complete after Ajith finished shooting the October schedule for Good Bad Ugly. In December 2024, the team left to Bangkok for filming the final schedule, which would be held for ten days. Principal photography wrapped on 22 December 2024. Scenes featuring Azerbaijni actors were shot in Azerbaijani.


=== Post-production ===
The production house on 28 October 2024 announced that the film has entered the dubbing stage. On 7 December 2024, Ajith completed dubbing for his portions in Baku.


== Music ==

The soundtrack is composed by Anirudh Ravichander, in his first collaboration with Magizh; third with Ajith after Vedalam (2015) and Vivegam (2017). The audio rights were acquired by Sony Music India. The first single, "Sawadeeka" released on 27 December 2024. The second single "Pathikichu" was released on 19 January 2025. The third single "Thaniye" was released on 5 February 2025.


== Marketing ==
The first look poster of Vidaamuyarchi was released on 30 June 2024, and was poorly received by fans for its minimalist details. The second look poster, released a week later, was better received and seen as an improvement.


== Release ==


=== Theatrical ===
Vidaamuyarchi was initially scheduled to be released in January 2025, during Pongal, but was postponed due to undisclosed reasons. It was released theatrically on 6 February, having received a U/A certificate from the Central Board of Film Certification, with a runtime of 150 minutes and 46 seconds.


=== Distribution ===
Red Giant Movies acquired the distribution rights of the film for Tamil Nadu, Sree Gokulam Movies for Kerala, Swagath Enterprises for Karnataka, Asian Suresh Entertainment LLP for Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, and Sri Lakshmi Movies for Ceded Area.


=== Home media ===
The post-theatrical streaming rights were acquired by Netflix for ₹100 crore.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Vidaamuyarchi received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the lead cast's performance, visuals and action sequences, while the storyline and narration received criticism.
Ankit Oljha of The National News gave 4/5 stars and wrote that the "overall winner" was the director, "who helms a glossy big-budget thrill-a-minute joyride, and gives everything a chance to shine, from its lead star's screen presence and the gritty action sequences to the excellent character work and focused storytelling." Goutham S of Pinkvilla gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "If you're looking to enjoy an action flick driven by Ajith's presence, Vidaamuyarchi is worth watching, offering an engaging experience for both fans and general audiences alike." Avinash Ramachandran of The Indian Express gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "While the film is heavily revolving around Ajith, and he does a commendable job of dealing with anguish and perseverance [...] Vidaamuyarchi, existing in this form, is a fascinating addition to the evolving standards of superstar films in Tamil cinema."
Sudhir Srinivasan of Cinema Express gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Vidaamuyarchi is not a film about a hero who smashes his enemies into dust. It is a film about a man and a woman who refuse to turn on each other." Janani K of India Today gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Vidaamuyarchi lacked an emotional arc and some solid twists and turns. While it remained true to the film's genre, it could have had more gravitas." Kirubhakar Purushothaman of News18 gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Vidaamuyarchi is largely engaging throughout despite the predictability, and the credit goes to Magizh Thirumeni, who is exceptional in his smooth expositions."
Anusha Sundar of OTTPlay gave 3/5 stars and wrote "With gripping action sequences, a well-structured screenplay, and an understanding of story sense, Vidaamuyarchi is not your typical star-driven film." Sridevi S of The Times of India gave 2.5/5 stars and wrote "Vidaamuyarchi might find its space with some niche audience, but a racy screenplay, especially considering the genre, could have made the movie dearer to all." Gopinath Rajendran of The Hindu wrote "It's in the execution of ideas that Vidaamuyarchi falters the most. The basic plot is painfully simple and predictable, and the makers' attempts to add tension fall flat as we see a fair share of twists coming a mile away." Latha Srinivasan of Hindustan Times appreciated the cinematography but criticised the music, action sequences and felt the editing could have been "tighter".


=== Box office ===
Vidaamuyarchi reportedly grossed over ₹61 crore (US$7.0 million) in its opening day worldwide. and a 4 day worldwide gross collection of ₹108.75 crore (US$13 million).


== Controversies ==
In April 2024, Ajith's manager Suresh Chandra released a video from the Azerbaijan schedule in November 2023, where Ajith and Arav faced a major accident, when a car driven by the former lost control as he intended to make a side stop. While Suresh insisted on the video being released four months later, was to dismiss rumours of the film being shelved, it was met with backlash from fans who dismissed it as an attempt to seek sympathy.
A few days after the teaser's release, Paramount Pictures reportedly filed a notice against the film's makers, alleging that the film shared similarities with Breakdown and sought damages of ₹150 crore (US$17 million) for intellectual property infringement. However, Chitra Lakshmanan, who was in contact with the makers, claimed they had brought the remake rights three months prior upon noticing the similarities between both films.
The film's postponement from January 2025 was met with criticism from fans of Ajith towards the production house as Good Bad Ugly was already pushed back from its January release window to accommodate Vidaamuyarchi, and this film's postponement left no Ajith release in January. Suresh Kamatchi, co-producer of the Pongal release Vanangaan, also criticised the producers for their sudden, uninformed decision as he felt it affected Pongal, an ideally lucrative box office season, making it less competitive and potentially minimising audience expectations.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Vidaamuyarchi at IMDb 
Vidaamuyarchi at Rotten Tomatoes